







    Clockwork System - Open Game License
   


     Updated automatically every 5 minutes
    







      System
     



      ©2015 Daniel Burrow DBA Cracked Monocle
     



      This is the Open Game License (OGL) version of this text. The OGL is found at the end of this document.
     








       Front Matter
      





       Roleplaying
      





       You as the Player
      





       The Building of a Story
      





       You as the Narrator
      





       Creating the Party
      





       Steampunk
      





       Chapter 1 - The Clockwork System
      





       Entering the Clockwork
      





       Dice & Modifiers
      





       Four Tiers of Success
      





       Turns!
      





       Attributes & Skills
      





       Specialties
      





       Hit Points, Damage, and All That Stuff
      





       Breaking Down the Mechanism
      





       Action Points (AP)
      





       Turn Order
      





       Attributes
      





       Hit Points & Wounds
      





       Regaining Health
      





       Priority
      





       Damage Classes
      





       Stories
      





       Note to the Narrator: Awarding Stories
      





       Attacking
      





       Specialty Attacks
      





       How We Roll
      





       Rule #1
      





       Rule #2
      





       Actions
      





       Attack
      





       Called Shot
      





       Deflect
      





       Draw or Swap an Item
      





       Enter a Stance
      





       Grab
      





       Throw
      





       Move
      





       Ready a Firearm
      





       Stand Up
      





       Sunder
      





       Miscellaneous Actions
      





       Reflexive Attacks
      





       Leaving Cover
      





       Using an Item
      





       Fighting out of Combat
      





       Called Shots
      





       Attributes
      





       Using Attributes
      





       Note to the Narrator: When to Ask for Attribute Rolls
      





       Resists
      





       Dodging Blasts      (1 AP Dexterity resist)
      





       Social Tells
      





       Using Social Tells
      





       Cover
      





       Soft Cover
      





       Taking Total Cover
      





       Melee Attacks versus Cover
      





       Firing Blindly
      





       Hiding Spots
      





       Status Effects
      





       Battlefield Modifier
      





       Chapter 2 - Character Creation
      





       Making a Character
      





       Note to the Narrator: Choosing Traits
      





       Note to the Narrator: Altering Starting Cash
      





       Leveling Up
      





       Retrofitting
      





       Note to the Narrator: Further Retrofitting
      





       Chapter 3 - Races
      





       Humans
      





       Traits of a Human
      





       Random Racial Traits
      





       Ayodin
      





       Excerpt from the 842 Census
      





       Ayodin Religions
      





       Technology of the Deep
      





       Traits of an Ayodin
      





       Random Racial Traits
      





       Elves
      





       Anti-Elven Prejudices
      





       Why Elves stay Elves
      





       Traits of an Elf
      





       Random Racial Traits
      





       Farishtaas
      





       Personality Blender
      





       Become a Farishtaa Today!
      





       Traits of a Farishtaa
      





       Random Racial Traits
      





       Gnomes
      





       Traits of a Gnome
      





       Random Racial Traits
      





       Satyrs
      





       Traits of a Satyr
      





       Random Racial Traits
      





       Chapter 4: Context
      





       Evanglessians
      





       Dalvozzeans
      





       Izedans
      





       Paldoran Exiles
      





       Zel Hauds
      





       Organizations
      





       p The Brimstones M
      





       p The Carnival M
      





       p Coaldust Unions M
      





       p Fulbourne Society M
      





       p Highflyers M
      





       Background Stories
      





       Tailemy
      





       Free Will
      





       Jinzium
      





       Chapter 5: Gear
      





       Materials
      





       The Trust
      





       Melee Weaponry
      





       Firearms
      





       Animals
      





       Horses
      





       Canines
      





       Birds of Prey
      





       Equipment
      





       For Sale
      





       Chapter 6 - Brute
      





       Brawl Skill
      





       Frenzy Skill
      





       Overpower Skill
      





       Resilience Skill
      





       Chapter 7 - Cunning
      





       Espionage Skill
      





       Expertise Skill
      





       Showmanship Skill
      





       Tactical Skill
      





       Chapter 8 - Dexterity
      





       Ace Skill
      





       Agility Skill
      





       Marksmanship Skill
      





       Swashbuckling Skill
      





       Chapter 9 - Spirit
      





       Faith Skill
      





       Grace Skill
      





       Luck Skill
      





       Shamanism Skill
      





       Chapter 10 - Sciences
      





       Crafting
      





       Alchemy Skill
      





       Armsmith Skill
      





       Crafting Firearms & Crossbows
      





       Crafting Melee Weapons & Throwing Weapons
      





       Crafting Bows
      





       Crafting Armor
      





       Automata Skill
      





       Bio-Flux Skill
      





       Crafting Bio-Zappers
      





       Engineer Skill
      





       Armoring Vehicles
      





       Gadgetry Skill
      





       Chapter 11 - Narrating
      





       Assembling a Party
      





       Appendices
      





       Specialty Listings
      





       Appendix I: Open Game License Version 1.0a
      












      Front Matter
     



      Roleplaying
     



      You as the Player
     



      If
 you’re joining us as a player, welcome to roleplaying. Roleplaying is a
 wonderful gaming experience unlike all other tabletop games. In many 
games you are given a character to represent, and you take that 
character around a board, attempting to win the game. Roleplaying games 
take that to an extreme, then twist it.
     



      You
 create your own character, develop their personality and abilities, 
then try to act and portray them as closely as possible. You can build 
them however you want, customize them, give them the hair you’ve always 
wanted, a dashing vest, and that enormous firearm you drool over in your
 daydreams. You give that character a name, a back-story, and a 
personality. Once you’ve done that, you’re pretty well ready to begin.
     



      You
 join up with a couple other players, each with their own character. 
Together you become a party of adventurers.
     



      Another
 person takes on the role of narrator. In many games, this is the game 
master (or GM, if you will). The narrator weaves together a story, a 
setting, and other characters for you to interact with, meet, and - when
 necessary - kill. The narrator is there to give you a scene and let you
 explore it. You may start in a pub, travel across the city, and take 
off in an airship to explore the rumors of a clockwork monstrosity in a 
nearby town. After you become the hero of that town, you’ve only just 
started your saga; soon, you’ll have numerous stories under your belt, a
 scar or two, and a character to be proud of.
     







      The Building of a Story
     



      Through
 your roleplaying you will create a story. You will be one of the 
protagonists of this story, a story that you make with a handful of 
other protagonist and a narrator who has no control over the heroes.
     



      The
 art of roleplaying is getting deep into the character and the saga. The
 entire game is about you being another person in this alternate 
reality. You will eventually learn what your character’s goals are, what
 makes your character angry, and what gives your character joy. That is 
roleplaying at its finest.
     



      But
 let’s be real...there’s another part to this roleplaying game. You want
 to be awesome, and you want to be the best. Perfect, then! This system 
is designed to make every aspect of roleplaying fun, and that includes 
challenging every person or thing you meet to a fierce duel to the 
death!
     







      You as the Narrator
     



      Did
 you get the bug? Did you get the urge to make your own story, see how 
your friends make it through, overcome seemingly impossible odds, and 
fight off that villain that you’ve been secretly fleshing out for the 
past year? Don’t worry, this is normal. It happens to all of us.
     



      When
 you narrate, you’re given a very special duty by the players. You are 
there to ensure that they are enjoying themselves, and that their 
characters are gaining all of the thrills and excitements you could 
possibly lend to them.
     



      If
 this is your first time, be prepared to have fun. That’s both advice 
and a fact - narrating is exciting in ways that players could never 
understand. It’s engaging, challenging, and requires a very active 
imagination. More so than anyone else at the table, you are helping to 
build a story. When you take on the mantle of the narrator, you get the 
pleasure of challenging your friends, rewarding them for their 
victories, and creating a saga of great stories they’ll all remember for
 years to come.
     



      Sounds promising, doesn’t it?
     







      Creating the Party
     



      Within
 Tephra, we often recommend that people play with three to five players 
and a narrator. If you’re up to the challenge, more or less players 
might be a better fit for you. (And yes, less than three players can be 
quite challenging, as only having a couple adventurers can create a 
rather demanding game!)
     



      If
 you’re having a hard time getting players, just carry this book in a 
public space for a couple hours. Before long, you’ll have a large horde 
of people wanting to play (begging, probably). And, if that doesn’t 
work, go to your local gaming shop and ask them if they have any 
suggestions. Most gaming stores will have places where you can post that
 you’re looking for players. Our favorite gaming stores will also have 
dedicated Tephra nights every week. I’ll bet my sideburns they can help 
you get a game going or find a game for you to join.
     



      Once
 you’ve got your group together, you’ll need one person to be the 
narrator and everyone else will need to make characters. Go through our 
fast and easy character creation process (over in Chapter 2), and soon 
you’ll be on board your airship, taking on zombies and sky pirates with a
 gun in one hand and a saber clenched between your teeth.
     







      Steampunk
     



      Steampunk
 is one of those genres that seems to entrance people as soon as they 
see it, something that sparks their inner creativity. It appeals to our 
love for the past and the marvels of the future, combining them into a 
world of our own making. However, despite being easily identifiable as 
you walk down the street or look through a store window, defining 
steampunk is a difficult task caused by the broad interpretation of what
 “steampunk” is. From steampunk proper to dieselpunk, biopunk to 
clockpunk and so many more, there are as many different flavors of the 
movement as there are of music. That being said, there are unifying 
themes throughout them all, so no other title can truly encapsulate just
 what the word steampunk entails.
     



      On
 the surface, steampunk is an aesthetic movement, one that hails back to
 the Victorian times and the Industrial Revolution, a time when the ins 
and outs of a machine could be understood and mastered by a single man. A
 time when you could look at the inner workings of our technology and 
follow the cranks, pistons and gears all the way from the boiler to the 
wheels. With a curious mind, time and patience, any man could master 
this new technology. Steampunk takes this mindset and runs with it. As 
many felt during the Victorian era, in Steampunk anything is possible!
     



      It
 was also during the Victorian Era when both man and society began to 
change. Following on the heels of the Enlightenment, thousands of slaves
 were freed and a middle class was established. The culture of 
Colonialism was in full swing around the world; revolutions were 
occurring that threw out old rulers, building new governments in their 
stead. Everyone had a hope for a better, brighter future.
     



      Steampunk
 is more than just the aesthetics of a proper London gentleman with his 
tailored coat and top hat, and it’s more than the social reforms and 
exploration of the Victorian era. In fact, it’s more than the past ever 
was. Steampunk is looking at a world that could have been during a time 
where the Victorians thought anything was possible. Who cares that 
sky-pirates, intelligent clockwork automatons, machine-powered undead, 
time machines and ray guns never existed? The Victorians believed 
someday steampowered airships or cannons would allow us to reach the 
moon. In a future of our own creation, why can’t these other things 
exist just as easily? A world influenced from the past, but purely 
created by those who live now. A world in which anyone can experience an
 adventure. Steampunk is what you make of it.
     



      In
 Tephra, we give reasons for why these things are possible. We have 
forsaken following Earth’s history and instead come to land on a new 
world, a world in which their Industrial Revolution took a drastically 
different path than that of our own. Here, steampunk thrives in a world 
full of steampowered machinery, clockwork creations of massive scale, 
entire continents of unexplored wilderness and lost civilizations just 
waiting to be rediscovered. You can hop on an airship capable of 
crossing the world, twisting science to your own end. It’s a world where
 everywhere you look, an adventure is waiting to happen.
     



      So
 sure, you could define Steampunk simply by the gears, leather outfits, 
top hats, and monocles, but it is so much more than that. Steampunk 
embodies hope, creativity and adventure. Whether you draw influences 
from the Wild West, Victorian England, the Colonies of Africa, the Far 
East, or anywhere else, it is these things that truly define what the 
genre is.
     







      Chapter 1 - The Clockwork System
     



      Entering the Clockwork
     



      There’s a lot of text in this book. Don’t be afraid…it won’t take you long to start enjoying your stay.
     



      This
 is a richly customizable mechanism with a variety of rules, ticking 
tidbits, and random springs. Inside of this mechanism is a single 
clockwork movement that makes the rest of the system function. Once 
you’ve seen how the basic movement works, everything else won’t 
 seem so daunting.
     







      Dice & Modifiers
     



      To
 begin, you’ll need a single die: a unique one with 12 sides. This is 
the foundation for the Clockwork System, a die that can randomly give 
you any number from 1 to 12.
     



      With
 this special die, occasionally called the D12, you’ll be able to 
determine how successful you are on any given task. You’ll have skills, 
attributes, and various other traits that all have numbers assigned to 
them. When you need to determine how well you succeed at something, 
you’ll roll your die and add on the appropriate number.
     



      Rolling
 your Dexterity? Roll your D12, add the number in your Dexterity 
attribute, and you’ve got your result.
     







      Four Tiers of Success
     



      The
 game revolves around tiers - four tiers, to be exact. Once you’ve 
received the result of your die roll, you’ll be able to determine what 
tier it is.
     







      T1
 (Tier 1):         Result of 1 
through 
9                Barely
 Passing
     



      T2 (Tier 2): 
        Result of 10 through 
19        A Solid Success
     



      T3
 (Tier 3):         Result of 20 
through 29        Phenomenal!
     



      T4
 (Tier 4):         Result of 30 
or 
more                Beyond
 Human
     







      As
 you can see, tier 1 is going to be the most minimal of a success. If 
you’re trying to jump, all you can say is that you successfully jumped. 
Nobody takes notice up until you get to tier 2. A tier 3 is the utmost 
of human ability. If you’re hitting a tier 3, that means you’ve just 
leapt a chasm.
     



      A tier 4? There are no words to explain a tier 4 success.
     







      Turns!
     



      Let’s
 discuss combat. If you’re in a fight with somebody, you’re going to 
take turns. You’ll begin by rolling priority. The person with the 
highest priority goes first, the person with the next highest goes 
second, and so on. When it’s your turn, you’re going to have a number of
 action points (AP) that you can spend.
     



      Let’s
 say it’s your turn, and you have 3 action points (the norm for starting
 characters). You could run (1 AP) and shoot your rifle (2 AP). Or, you 
could run (1 AP), open a door (1 AP), and then duck behind a barrel (1 
AP). Or, you could swing your sword (2 AP) at somebody’s head (another 1
 AP for aiming).
     



      The options are pretty open-ended.
     







      Attributes & Skills
     



      As
 we’ve said, your character is going to have a lot of numbers associated
 with him. When you build your character (found in Chapter 2 - Character
 Creation), you’ll first distribute some points in your skills. Skills 
are those areas that you’ve trained in. Swashbuckling, Brawl, Gadgetry, 
Marksmanship - these are all skills.
     



      Now,
 your skills are going to determine your attributes. Attributes are the 
core components of your character. If you have a total of 6 points in 
your Dexterity skills, your Dexterity will be a +6.
     



      When
 do you use these numbers? For attributes: all the time. Lifting 
something? Brute. Picking somebody’s wallet? Dexterity. Trying to figure
 out a puzzle? Cunning.
     







      Specialties
     



      The
 most exciting part of your character is their specialties. Specialties 
are the defining aspects of your character, things that make them 
awesome. At first level, you’ll start with three, and you’ll choose them
 from your skills. When you need to make a roll to determine how well 
you use your specialty, you’ll roll your skill.
     







      Hit Points, Damage, and all that stuff
     



      A
 lot of your statistics will be determined by the specialties that you 
select, the stories that you gain, and the race that you choose. But, 
honestly, this is all clockwork. Once you start building a character, 
everything else will fall into place.
     







      Breaking down the Mechanism
     



      Did
 the last page not explain things enough for you? Then keep on reading.
     



      Action Points (AP)
     



      During
 your turn, you have 3 action points you can spend to move, attack, or 
do virtually anything. Every action has an action point cost, though 
some are free (and, often, can be done at any time).
     



      Refresh:
 Your action points refresh at the end of your turn. So as soon as your 
turn ends, you may start using reflexives that drain your next turn’s 
action point pool.
     



      Reflexives:
 You can use action points reflexively. When you’ve trained yourself so 
well that you can act in a split second, that’s when you’re using your 
AP reflexively.
     



      Reflexives
 are action points you can use out-of-turn. You might have a specialty, 
for example, that allows you to jump in front of an incoming bullet for 
an ally (Interposition, found under the Resilience skill). That 
specialty costs 2 action points reflexively, which you may do any time 
an ally is being attacked. Your reflexive action points come out of your
 next turn’s pool of action points. So if you used interposition, on 
your next turn you’d only have 1 action point left.
     



      Your
 action point pool increases at certain levels. You’ll find those in 
this chart:
     







      Turn Order
     



      When
 combat begins, every combatant rolls their priority, creating a “turn 
order.” Everybody starts the combat with their action points full, so 
they can start making reflexive actions right away. The person with the 
highest priority roll goes first. That person could then use any of 
their action points they have, and, once they’re done, their action 
points refresh.
     



      A
 person can never save action points for their next turn. When your 
action points refresh, they are hitting a hard reset and going to their 
normal value. Any action points from your previous turn that you did not
 use are wasted - so go ahead, use them!
     







      Attributes
     



      Your
 attributes are the key building blocks of your character. Attributes 
reflect your training in your skills and are entirely based off of them.
 Every skill falls under one of our five key attributes: Brute, Cunning,
 Dexterity, Spirit, and Sciences. Once you’ve selected your skills, add 
up the skills under those attributes to get your points in that 
attribute.
     



      You’ll
 find yourself using attributes both in and out of combat. Attributes 
are used to resist special attacks, called shots, poisons, and all other
 manner of contraptions. If you’re being tricked, you would resist with 
your Cunning attribute. If you’ve been hit in the head, you’d resist 
getting a concussion with your Brute attribute.
     



      Likewise,
 attributes determine how well you interact with people and the setting.
 How easily you can sneak around depends on your Dexterity. Holding the 
door closed as enemies try to break in requires Brute. Any time you’re 
trying to convince somebody of something, you’ll roll your Cunning. 
Throughout the entire system, these five attributes will be keys to your
 character and help him or her grow.
     







      Hit Points & Wounds
     



      Hit
 points are a reflection of a character’s toughness and willpower to 
keep on fighting. During combat, every time a character is successfully 
hit, their hit points will decrease. If all of a character’s hit points 
are depleted, a character begins to take wounds. Wounds are substantial 
damage taken to the character’s bodily form, such as deep gashes or 
wracking blows.
     



      Your
 hit points are determined by your specialties, and the amount of wounds
 you have will start at 12.
     



      Hit
 points are only in effect while you’re ready for action. When your 
character is asleep, in a focused conversation, or for some reason not 
paying attention, your hit points don’t come into play. Any time you are
 hit while not prepared, the damage goes straight into your wounds pool.
     



      Wounds
 Damage: Every time you take wounds damage, your character suffers a 
grievous hit. When you take wounds damage, you roll on our called shot 
chart and take the wound effect from that location. If you rolled “Left 
Hand,” for example, your hand would be smashed and you’d have a hard 
time grasping anything with it.
     



      If
 you’re hit by an attack and you run out of wounds, you immediately roll
 randomly on the called shot chart, this time for a fatal effect. If you
 rolled “Left Hand” again for the fatal effect, your hand would be 
severed and you could never use that hand again (unless somebody could 
create you a prosthetic hand). Though that might sound bad, if you’re 
unlucky enough for the attack to land across your head, your fatal 
effect is instantaneous death.
     



      Once
 you’re out of wounds, every time you take damage, you roll for a fatal 
effect.
     







      Regaining Health
     



      Taking
 a Breather: Hit points don’t take a long time to return to you. We 
assume that every blow to your stamina is a small scrape, bruise, or 
just a representation of you becoming more exhausted.
     



      To
 replenish your hit points after a battle, just take a breather. If you 
have time to rest for fifteen to thirty minutes after a battle, all of 
your hit points will be returned.
     



      Naturally
 Healing Wounds: Your wounds will return to you at the rate of one wound
 per day. Your pool of wounds is likely to be much smaller than your hit
 points, and it takes longer to regenerate them. Be careful when you’re 
in wounds.
     















      Priority
     



      Priority
 determines your turn order. Priority represents a character’s awareness
 of their current environment and their alertness of the situation. To 
determine priority, each player involved in combat will roll and add any
 bonuses to priority that they have.
     



      A
 player may request to be given a circumstantial bonus by consulting the
 narrator. With proper justification, the narrator has the right to 
grant the player a bonus to their priority (normally a +6). This is 
typically done when a character is ready for combat, has their revolver 
drawn, and is aching to go. This character is likely to go before the 
guy sitting in the corner, drinking a glass of wine.
     



      Multiple
 players may request this benefit, but the narrator is never obligated 
to anybody. If too many people can justify gaining a priority bonus, 
then everyone’s starting on the same footing and should probably just go
 without any bonuses.
     



      If
 the characters are ready for the combat before the combat truly begins,
 they can be in their stances and have their weapons already drawn.
     







      Damage Classes
     



      Weapons
 and most attacks have damage classes. The damage class of a weapon 
varies based on the size of the weapon. Light melee weapons, for 
example, have a damage class of 4, while heavy melee weapons have a 
damage class of 8.
     



      The
 damage class determines how much damage it will do for any given tier. 
If you get a tier 1 result, your damage dealt will be equal to the 
damage class. If you get a tier 2 result, the damage dealt will be twice
 the damage class. Tier 3 triples the damage class.
     



      Most
 easily put, the damage you deal for an attack is equal to your damage 
class times the tier.
     







      Stories
     



      Stories
 are memories of adventures past, things you take with you throughout 
your lifelong journeys. Stories are not active abilities for you to use;
 they are simply past experiences that make obstacles you face now 
either easier to face or harder.
     



      You
 have some stories before you even start your days as an adventurer, 
such as past job experiences in the form of Background Stories, or 
affiliations with different organizations through Membership Stories. 
All other Stories attached to your character are awarded by your 
narrator. For instance, should you continually act crude and vulgar, 
your narrator may choose to give you the Yobbish Personality Story, and 
you gain all of the bonuses and penalties that go along with it. 
However, should your personality change and you cease your vulgarity, 
your narrator is fully within their rights to take that Story away.
     



      Some
 Stories are, on the other hand, permanent modifiers of your character, 
and earning such a Story means you would have to do something extremely 
drastic to be rid of it. This of course would come in the form of a 
different Story taking the former’s place. Perfect examples of this are 
Alteration Stories, which are Stories that affect your character’s 
physical make-up.
     







      Note to the Narrator: Awarding Stories
     



      Stories
 are entirely given out and taken away at your discretion. If you don’t 
feel like giving a player a Story they seem to meet the requirements of,
 you are fully able to simply ignore them and not give it to them. At 
the same time, Stories make adventures that much more exciting. A player
 can go up to another and show them the Stories their character has 
collected as a symbol of pride. On the other end of the spectrum, 
Stories can also be in your arsenal of weapons against the player. If a 
player keeps trying to melee fight with clockwork abominations that use 
giant torches, have the abomination attack their face and give them the 
Burn Victim Alteration Story. Feel free to let players take one or two 
Personality and Background Stories when they first build their 
character, but make sure you know have an idea about the roleplay 
requirements for them.
     











      Attacking
     



      Attacking
 is a simple process. Both combatants roll, the attacker to hit and the 
defender to evade. If the accuracy meets or exceeds the evade, the 
attack lands. Then the attacker rolls for strike and the defender rolls 
for defense. The damage dealt is based on the weapon used and is put 
against a tiered result. The defense works the same way, soaking an 
amount of damage based on the armor worn.
     







      Accuracy
     



      When
 delivering an attack, you must first land it. You make an attack 
against the target’s evade. If the accuracy meets or exceeds the evade, 
the attack hits.
     



      Vs
     



      Evade
     



      When
 receiving an attack, you want to evade it. The attacker makes an 
accuracy roll against the defender’s evade. If the evade exceeds the 
accuracy, the attack misses.
     







      Strike
     



      Once
 you are sure that an attack has landed, how hard the strike hit is 
decided. Use your roll, add your strike, and then tier the results. The 
tier will then deal the indicated amount of damage to the defender.
     



      Vs
     



      Defense
     



      In
 preparation for an incoming blow, the target readies his defenses. Roll
 again, add your defense, and then tier the results. The tier will then 
soak damage from the opponent’s attack.
     







      Specialty Attacks
     



      Normally,
 melee attacks require 2 action points (unarmed attacks require 1 AP and
 ranged attacks vary). Characters can make unique attacks using 
specialties for extra action points. Many specialties will be labeled as
 “attack + x AP.” Therefore, when you decide to make a specialty attack,
 you announce the attack and spend the total action point cost in order 
to attempt it.
     



      You
 may stack special attacks if you have enough action points to do so. 
For example, if you have two specialties that both say “melee attack +1 
AP,” you may make your melee attack (for 2 action points) and add both 
specialties onto it (at 1 action point apiece), which would be a single 
attack that costs 4 AP to make. Be careful, though: if your opponent 
manages to evade, you’ve just used 4 action points on a single attack! 
You cannot add a single attack-modifying specialty twice, however.
     











      How We Roll
     



      Explaining
 how to roll a single die may seem asinine, but I’m going to do it 
anyway (but only because we have two special rules about die rolling).
     







      Rule #1
     



      1 is 1
     



      This
 rule is simple. A roll of a 1 results in a 1. Whenever you roll a 1 on 
your twelve-sided die, you are not allowed to add anything to it. We 
don’t care if you have a +48 in brute; when you roll that 1, you receive
 a 1.
     



      The
 only exception to this rule regards negatives. If you have some penalty
 on your roll (such as being blind, which incurs a -4 on accuracy 
rolls), a 1 is not a 1. Negatives still apply. So your blind accuracy 
roll was not a 1, it was a -3.
     







      Rule #2
     



      Pure 12s Roll Again
     



      It’s
 true. If you roll a pure 12 (as in, a 12 on the twelve-sided die is 
showing), you roll again. You then add your new roll to 12 in order to 
determine the result.
     



      If you roll 12 again, you keep on going.
     



      Just
 so it’s clear, if you roll a 1 after rolling a 12, the result is a 13. 
Rule #1 no longer applies.
     



      If
 you are rolling a 12 randomly to determine what called shot location 
you hit, this rule need not apply.
     











      Actions
     



      Now let’s see what you can do.
     



      Attack
     



      Cost: 2 AP for Most Weapons, 1 AP for Unarmed
     



      Attacking
 somebody can be anything from stabbing with your rapier to swinging 
your whip to firing your pistol. You choose a target and you attack.
     



      Your
 choice of weapon determines how many action points it cost, though most
 will use 2 action points. Your damage is also determined by your choice
 of weapon.
     



      Non-Lethal
 Attacks: You hold your blows just a little bit, aiming for areas that 
won’t kill the person. You can make a non-lethal attack just like a 
regular attack; however, if the opponent takes any wounds damage, he 
does not have to roll on the wounds effect chart. Instead of dying, the 
opponent falls unconscious upon reaching 0 wounds.
     







      Called Shot
     



      Cost: Attack +1 AP
     



      Sometimes
 you don’t just want to hurt them. Sometimes you want to stab them in 
the eyes, smash their fingers, or kick them in the balls. These options 
are Called Shots.
     



      To
 make a called shot, choose one of the 12 key parts of the body (found 
on the Called Shot pages, a couple pages over) and make an attack. The 
attack is just like any other attack, except that it requires one extra 
action point to do. Thus, a normal melee attack made as a called shot 
would be three action points, whereas a called shot that was unarmed 
would be two action points. Called shots can also be made with ranged 
weapons.
     



      Every
 called shot is resistable. The resist is based on your strike (or 
accuracy with firearms and crossbows), for which the target must roll 
the appropriate attribute and exceed your strike in order to resist.
     



      Stacking
 Called Shot Effects: The effects from called shots do not stack. If 
somebody is disoriented from a called shot to the brain, another called 
shot to the brain will only renew the effect, not double it. A called 
shot to the torso (to knock them back) or stunning them via a called 
shot to the neck are the only exceptions.
     



      Called
 Shot in Wounds & Fatals: A called shot while the target is in 
wounds or fatal effects will automatically hit that location. There’s no
 need to roll randomly. (For this reason, many people will do a called 
shot to a lethal location once a person has reached wounds and fatals, 
like to the head or chest.)
     







      Deflect
     



      Cost: 1 AP interruption
     



      Shields
 are used for deflecting incoming attacks. To make a shield deflection, 
you must be wielding a shield (or some other item you can make a 
deflection with) and be in the process of being attacked. Then, you can 
make a deflect attempt. When you deflect with a shield, it costs you 1 
action point and you gain a +4 on your evade roll.
     







      Draw or Swap an Item
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      You may swap weapons or pull out an item (such as a vial or explosive) for one action point.
     







      Enter a Stance
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      You
 may enter a stance for 1 action point. You can only be in one stance at
 a time. Oftentimes when combat begins you can simultaneously enter a 
stance, costing no action points. Any time you take on a specialized 
stance, the effects of the stance remain active until you are knocked 
back, knocked prone, or are otherwise knocked out of your stance. You 
must then re-enter the stance to regain the benefits. At first the only 
stance your character knows how to enter is the “Footing” stance used to
 wield Super-Heavy items. You can learn more stances through certain 
specialties.
     







      Grab
     



      Cost: as an Unarmed Attack (1 AP) or Whip Attack (2 AP)
     



      Grabs
 are similar to called shots, but rather than hitting them there, you 
grab them. Your goal is not to deal damage but to take hold of your 
opponent and limit their movement.
     



      First
 choose a called shot location, then roll your accuracy versus their 
evade just as though you were doing a normal attack. However, you do not
 deal damage. If you land the attack, the target is grabbed. Once you 
grab the opponent, a few rules apply:
     



      Neither you nor the target can move without breaking the grab.
     



      The
 target can attempt to break free for 1 AP by making either a Brute or 
Dexterity resist against your Brute or Dexterity. You can let go for 0 
action points.
     



      If
 you grab the target’s hand, the target cannot use the weapon, item, or 
shield in that hand (beyond dropping it).
     







      Throw
     



      Resist: Brute (tier down)
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      After
 successfully grabbing a person, you may then throw them. Roll your 
Brute to determine how well you throw them. For every tier over tier 1 
that the opponent rolls their Brute, it lowers the effect by 1 tier. 
Note: small creatures, such as gnomes and most animals, are thrown an 
additional 5 feet.
     



      Opponent is thrown 5 feet.
     



      Opponent is thrown 10 feet.
     



      Opponent is thrown 10 feet and is now prone.
     



      Opponent is thrown 15 feet and is now prone.
     







      Move
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      You
 are able to move 25 feet for a single action point. Certain races 
(elves, gnomes, and satyrs) have different movement speeds.
     







      Ready a Firearm
     



      Cost: Varies
     



      Many
 firearms require you to ready them between each firing. This can be as 
simple as cocking back the hammer or as complex as muzzle-loading the 
musket. It all depends on the firearm. You can find out more about 
readying a firearm in the Gear chapter.
     







      Stand Up
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Sometimes, after you’ve been knocked prone, you just need to stand back up. Do so for 1 action point.
     



      Note:
 kneeling does not cost any action points as you are doing that as a 
combat action. Thus, you could kneel behind a low wall for no action 
points. If the wall’s only 1 foot tall, though, your narrator might rule
 that you need that 1 action point to get down into a flat position and 
stand up from it.
     







      Sunder
     



      Cost: as an Attack
     



      Resist: Dexterity (tiers down)
     



      Rather
 than attacking the person, the attack is against the wielded item, be 
it a weapon, shield, or vial of poison. Most items are instantly 
destroyed when attacked (such as poisons, complex machines, et cetera). 
Weapons last a little bit longer.
     



      A
 melee weapon’s damage class decreases every time it is struck by a 
sunder. The tier of the attack will indicate how much the weapon’s 
damage class decreases by. For example, a tier 2 attack would decrease 
the target’s weapon by 2 damage class. A sunder made against a firearm, 
crossbow, or bow is twice as effective, lowering the damage class by 2 
for every tier of the attack.
     



      The
 Dexterity resist will tier the effect down against a weapon (so if you 
get a tier 2 Dexterity resist, it lowers the effect by 1). If used 
against another item that is instantly destroyed by a sunder, the 
Dexterity resist can only negate by being a tier over the attack.
     



      A damaged weapon can be repaired during a breather.
     







      Miscellaneous Actions
     



      Cost: Varies
     



      There are a wide variety of other actions you may want to make while in combat. Here is a list of just some of those actions:
     



      Actions                        AP
 Cost
     



      Breaking a Window        1 AP
     



      Opening a Door        1 AP
     



      Pulling a Lever                1 AP
     







      Reflexive Attacks
     



      Actions you can do in an instant.
     



      Reflexive
 attacks are attacks that you can make when an opponent leaves 
themselves open. They are just like normal attacks - that is, they cost 
the same amount of action points and you can upgrade them with your 
specialties - but they can happen outside of your turn. And remember, 
your action points reset at the end of your turn, so after your turn, 
you’re back up to full.
     



      For
 most people, there are two actions that leave a person open to 
reflexive attacks: leaving cover and using, consuming, or drawing an 
item.
     







      Leaving Cover
     



      Can only be made with ranged attacks
     



      If a gunman is hiding behind a crate and leaves cover to take a shot, everyone can take a shot at him, because he is now open.
     



      If
 somebody is standing behind a tree and walks out from behind the tree, 
anybody with a gun ready can take a shot.
     



      Using an Item
     



      Can only be made with melee attacks
     



      If
 somebody pulls out an accelerator rifle, tries to drink a push potion, 
or flips on their unusual gadget within melee distance, anybody within 
melee range can make a reflexive attack.
     







      Fighting out of Combat
     



      Fighting
 out of combat may sound like an oxymoron, but it occurs any time where 
the defender is not fighting back. If you are stabbing somebody in their
 sleep, knocking somebody upside the head while they have their back 
turned, or otherwise dealing damage to a person who doesn’t think 
they’re in combat, you are fighting out of combat.
     







      No Hit Points
     



      Whenever
 a person is not at least partially ready for a fight themselves, they 
take direct wounds damage. Hit points are a reflection of combat 
stamina, and a person who is not in combat has no hit points. Therefore,
 if you are stabbed in the back, you take wounds damage.
     







      Coup de Grace
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      A
 coup de grace is a melee attack specifically meant to kill somebody. 
They can’t be fighting back, moving, or otherwise defending themselves. 
The attack deals direct damage to their wounds and they must roll on the
 wounds random effects chart. In a coup de grace, the attacker takes a 
pure 12 on their strike roll with the defender takes a natural 1 on 
their defense.
     



      Knock
 Out: A character can make a non-lethal coup de grace that works exactly
 like a coup de grace, except that the target falls unconscious upon 
reaching 0 wounds and does receive wounds random effects.
     







      Called Shots
     



      Called
 shots are all resistable. The defender must roll their resist 
attribute. If it exceeds the attacker’s strike roll (or accuracy roll 
for firearms and crossbows), the called shot is resisted.
     



      Wounded and Fatal effects can not be resisted.
     







      1
     



      Head
     



      Resist: Brute
     



      A shot to the head will disorient you (causing you to lose 1 action point per turn) until the end of your next turn.
     



      Wound:
     

      Disoriented
     



      A
 wound to the head causes long-term disorientation. While disoriented, 
you lose 1 action point per turn, and will be disoriented for 1 turn per
 3 points of damage the attack dealt to you. You cannot re-orient 
yourself from this wound.
     



      Fatal:
     

      Beheaded
     



      If your head is dealt a fatal blow, you instantly die.
     















      2
     



      Eyes
     



      Resist: Dexterity
     



      When
 a successful attack is made against your ocular region, your sight 
becomes blurry (giving you a -2 on accuracy and evade) until the end of 
your next turn.
     



      Wound:
     

      Blinded
     



      A
 wound to the eyes leaves you blinded until you can take a breather. You
 suffer a -4 on accuracy and evade rolls, and you cannot target 
opponents you can’t locate.
     



      Fatal:
     

      Blind
     



      A
 fatal to the eyes leaves you permanently blinded. You suffer a -4 on 
accuracy and evade rolls, and you cannot target opponents you can’t 
locate. Losing your eyes permanently drops your wounds by 1 point.
     















      3
     



      Ears
     



      Resist: Cunning
     



      When
 a successful attack is made against your aural region, your hearing 
becomes fuzzy (giving you a -2 on evade) until the end of your next 
turn.
     



      Wound:
     

      Deafened
     



      A
 wound to the ears leaves you deafened until you can take a breather. 
You suffer a -2 on evade rolls and any roll that requires listening, 
speaking, or performing a sound-based action.
     



      Fatal:
     

      Deaf
     



      A
 fatal to the ears leaves you permanently deafened. You suffer a -2 on 
evade rolls and any roll that requires listening, speaking, or 
performing a sound-based action. Losing your ears permanently drops your
 wounds by 1 point.
     















      4
     



      Neck
     



      Resist: Brute
     



      An
 attack against your neck can leave you gasping for air, unable to take 
actions. A successful called shot against your neck stuns you for 1 
action point.
     



      Wound:
     

      Bleeding
     



      A
 wound to the neck causes bleeding. Bleeding will cause you 1 point of 
wounds damage every turn after the one where you take the wound, and 
will last for 1 turn per 3 points of damage the attack dealt to you.
     



      Any sort of bloodclotting, medical healing, or artificial flesh imbuing will stop the bleeding.
     



      Fatal:
     

      Slit Throat
     



      If your neck is dealt a fatal blow, you will die at the end of your next turn.
     















      5
     



      Torso
     



      Resist: Brute
     



      A good blow to the torso can knock a person backwards. A successful torso called shot sends you backwards 5 feet.
     



      If the person dealing the attack is in melee with you, 
they may choose to follow you back the 5 feet for 0 action points.
     



      Wound:
     

      Broken Ribs
     



      Suffering
 broken ribs can make it difficult to breath. Any time you want to make 
any action, you must roll your Brute attribute. If you do not receive a 
tier 2 result, you fail and lose 1 action point. This wound will stay 
with you until your next breather.
     



      Fatal:
     

      Slain
     



      You are instantly killed.
     















      6
     



      Groin
     



      Resist: Spirit
     



      A
 blow to the groin makes you nauseated. You receive a -2 to all rolls 
until 3 action points have been spent emptying your stomach.
     



      Wound:
     

      Purge
     



      Your
 body begins to purge itself. You can take no actions beyond moving, and
 you only can go at half your normal speed (rounded down). While 
purging, if anybody attacks you, you suffer a -4 on your evade roll. The
 purging lasts for 3 turns.
     



      Fatal:
     

      Gutted
     



      Your
 vital organs are exposed to the world, and you are bleeding out. Unless
 you can recover 10 points of damage (wounds or hit points) before the 
end of your next turn, you will die.
     















      7-8
     



      Arm
     



      Resist: Brute
     



      An
 attack against your arm makes it difficult for you to use that hand. 
You take a -2 on any roll that would use that arm and hand, such as 
accuracy and strike, or evade if you are trying to use a shield with 
that hand, until the end of your next turn.
     



      Wound:
     

      Sprained Arm
     



      Your
 arm is sprained, making it near impossible for you to wield things with
 that arm. Anything that you do with the arm suffers a -6 on the roll. 
The wound will recover during your next breather.
     



      Fatal:
     

      Severed Arm
     



      Your
 arm is severed. You now have one less arm, and anything that requires 
you to use two arms cannot be accomplished. Ambiguous actions that would
 normally use two arms (such as lifting something over head or climbing)
 take a -6 on the roll. Having a severed arm permanently drops your 
wounds by 2 points (1 point for the arm and 1 point for the hand).
     



      The bleeding from a severed arm will cause you to die in 3
 turns if you do not spend at least 3 AP bandaging it up.
     



















      9-10
     



      Hand
     



      Resist: Dexterity
     



      An attack to the hand causes you to drop whatever you’re holding. Picking up a dropped item costs 1 action point.
     



      Wound:
     

      Bruised Hand
     



      Your
 hand is smashed, making it impossible for you to wield anything with 
that hand. The wound will recover during your next breather.
     



      Fatal:
     

      Severed Hand
     



      Your
 hand is severed. You now have one less hand, and anything that requires
 you to use two hands cannot be accomplished. Ambiguous actions that 
would normally use two hands (such as lifting something over head or 
climbing) take a -6 on the roll. Having a severed hand permanently drops
 your wounds by 1 point.
     



      The bleeding from a severed hand will cause you to die in
 6 turns if you do not spend at least 3 AP bandaging it up.
     















      11-12
     



      Leg
     



      Resist: Dexterity
     



      A
 called shot to the leg can either trip you or slow you down (attacker’s
 choice). If you are slowed, it will cost you 1 extra AP to move until 
the end of your next turn. If you’re tripped, you’re brought prone and 
lose your stance. While prone, you suffer a -1 on all combat rolls 
(accuracy, evade, strike, and defense), but can stand up for 1 action 
point.
     



      Wound:
     

      Sprained Leg
     



      Your
 leg is sprained. You suffer a -10 on your movement speed (though you 
cannot be dropped below a minimum of 5 feet) and you’re tripped 
(bringing you prone). The wound will recover during your next breather.
     



      Fatal:
     

      Severed Leg
     



      Part
 of your leg is severed. You suffer a -20 on your movement speed (though
 you cannot be dropped below a minimum of 5 feet). Anything that 
requires two legs, such as swimming, climbing, or kicking, suffers a -6 
on the roll. Having a severed leg permanently drops your wounds by 1 
point.
     



      The bleeding from a severed leg will cause you to die in 3 turns if you 
do not spend at least 3 AP bandaging it up.
     







      Attributes
     



      Attributes
 are the baseline pieces of your character. Your attributes determine 
how fast you react, how well you push back, how long you survive 
poisons, how quickly you process information, and a whole plethora of 
actions that anybody can do.
     



      There
 are five attributes: Brute, Cunning, Dexterity, Spirit, and Sciences. 
You will start with a zero in each of these attributes, but as you gain 
experience in your skills, your attributes will increase as well.
     



      Each
 attribute has a set of skills that fall underneath it. As you gain 
points in your skills, add up all of the skills under the attribute to 
figure out what your attribute score is.
     



      Using Attributes
     



      Each
 attribute will include a variety of different options you can use that 
attribute for.  Dexterity, for example, is used when tripping 
people, disarming them, trying to be stealthy, attempting to squeeze 
into a tight spot, or anytime that your hand-eye coordination is going 
to prove valuable.
     



      Anybody
 can do anything listed under attributes. Using attributes requires no 
training or skill. Most people will simply be average in the attributes 
(which means they have a zero). Others will excel in them.
     







      Note to the Narrator: When to Ask for Attribute Rolls
     



      Be
 sparing when asking for attribute rolls. On one hand, it is completely 
within your power to ask the players to roll their Dexterity to see if 
they fall down the stairs, but is it really necessary? Every attribute 
roll should have a deep impact on the story, otherwise it begins to lose
 its excitement and meaning.
     



      In
 Tephra, we utilize a system built on “Four Tiers of Success.” Whenever 
you ask for an attribute roll, don’t think of it as win or lose. Think, 
instead, that your player is going to succeed, but the roll will tell 
you how well. If a failure is going to cause the story to stall, make 
tier 1 a poor success. It’ll keep the story moving while giving the 
players some fun consequences.
     







      Resists
     



      Almost
 all abilities that affect somebody can also be resisted. The most 
common resist is, of course, your evade and defense - when attacked, 
your goal is to jump out of the way and take less damage. But other 
special attacks will often call for attribute-based resists. When you 
need to resist a tiered effect with an attribute resist, you simply 
lower the amount that the ability affects you by 1 tier for every tier 
you receive over tier 1.
     



      So,
 if you were using your Brute to resist against a marque 3 poison, and 
you made a tier 2 Brute roll, you would lower the poison’s marque by 1, 
being affected as though it were a marque 2 poison.
     







      Tier 1         Unaffected
     



      Tier 2        -1 Tier
     



      Tier 3        -2 Tiers
     



      Tier 4        -3 Tiers
     







      Dodging Blasts      (1 AP Dexterity resist)
     



      Any
 time you are affected by a blast (something that affects a large area),
 you may attempt to jump out of the blast area. It costs 1 action point 
reflexively, and you may only move up to your total speed in order to 
get out of the blast range. Thus, if the edge of the blast area is 40 
feet away, and you only have a 30 foot movement speed, there is no way 
you can jump out of the blast area.
     



      In
 order to successfully jump out of the blast area, you must roll your 
Dexterity and receive a tier result equal to the tier or marque of the 
blast. Thus, a tier 3 blast would require a tier 3 Dexterity result in 
order to jump out of it. (This is different from normal resists, which 
require you to receive a tier result one higher than the tier or mark of
 the ability in order to fully resist it.)
     



      If
 you fail to get out of the blast area, you move to the edge of the 
blast area (while still remaining within it) and take the normal damage,
 which you can still soak, if possible.
     







      Social Tells
     



      When
 interacting with other characters, it’s nearly impossible to quantify 
how likely they are to believe your lie or how stubborn they are toward 
your wild claims. Instead, you can search for their social tells. These 
are their non-verbal cues, often made unconsciously, that betray a 
character’s inner thoughts. You might be trying to decide if a man is 
lying. Successfully reading his social tells might let you notice his 
sweaty palms, his shifting eyes, and his constant checking of his watch.
 By this point, you’ll have a pretty good idea that he’s lying.
     



      Social
 tells are anything but absolute. He may look like he’s lying, but in 
reality he might just be late for a very important business meeting. The
 goal of social tells is to guide you toward the answer without outright
 saying, “The fellow is clearly lying.” The decision on how to act once 
you’ve observed somebody’s social tells is still up to you.
     



      A
 character will use social tells by rolling their Cunning and tiering 
the results.
     







      Tells
     



      When
 a character rolls to determine somebody’s tells, the narrator will 
describe key aspects of the target depending on the success of the roll.
 For example, you might be attempting to decide if he’s lying. Depending
 on how well you roll, you might get the following results:
     




       He seems rather sweaty, despite the chill in the room. Pretty much anybody would notice this.
      



       He is very stiff when he talks. He’s not making many gestures, he’s not looking you in the eyes, and his posture seems guarded.
      



       His
 humor seems forced. He’s scratching behind the ears and looking toward 
the door, as though he’s about to be rescued or make a quick getaway. He
 keeps looking at your pistol.
      



       His
 breathing has changed, and you detect a change in his heart beat due to
 the cadence in his voice. He has shifted just slightly, so that the 
table is positioned more between you.
      








      As the result for social tells gets higher, the narrator might give you either more information or more useful information.
     







      Resisting Social Tells
     



      When
 a person begins looking for social tells, they are testing the air for 
information. Other characters might be aware of their social tells and 
attempt to hide them. As such, they can roll a Cunning resist, which 
will tier down the player’s result.
     



      Alternatively,
 some characters just won’t have social tells. A man who is known for 
his stoic demeanor may have few noticeable social tells, and he might 
need a tier 3 or tier 4 to figure out his motives.
     







      Control Remains with the Character
     



      The
 social tell system is designed to help a character convince others or 
manipulate a social situation. However, the ultimate choice of how to 
act remains with the adventurers and NPCs. The players are not told 
directly, “This man is lying,” just like the NPC who is being 
intimidated is not forced to back down because of a good roll. Their 
decisions should be made in line with their character and how they would
 react to the information received.
     







      Using Social Tells
     



      Lie Detecting
     



      Resist: Cunning (tiers down)
     



      When
 somebody has made a statement that you think isn’t true, you can 
attempt to detect the lie. You can look for their level of confidence 
and conviction, how strongly they make the statement, whether they seem 
nervous, are looking away, or are excessively sweating. When you roll to
 detect a lie, the target can resist with their own Cunning.
     







      Pacifying & Intimidating
     



      Resist: Spirit (tiers down)
     



      Attempting
 to pacify or intimidate a target can cause them to back down, calm 
down, or suddenly fear you. It’s a great way to get information or to 
get past a potential obstacle. When you are attempting to pacify a 
target, you’re trying to find just the right things to say in order to 
make the target less aggressive. Intimidation is similar, but it 
typically revolves around making the target afraid of you.
     



      Unlike
 most social tells, the target will typically be resisting with their 
Spirit attribute, as they are trying to bolster their own resolve to 
keep on fighting.
     







      Provoking
     



      Resist: Cunning (tiers down)
     



      When
 you go to provoke somebody, you are trying to elicit a certain type of 
response. Perhaps you’re attempting to make them angry, to say something
 they don’t want to say, or even just to laugh. Sometimes you will 
provoke somebody so that, in the midst of combat, the target will only 
attack you.
     



      When
 you roll for social tells to provoke a person, you’re looking for a way
 to get your response. If your target is a proper gentleman, you might 
look for a wedding ring to determine that he’s in a committed marriage 
and some snide comments about his wife could make him angry. If a guard 
seems to take great pride in the emblem on his armor, you might make a 
joke about his organization.
     







      Cover
     



      When an opponent is behind a wall, a thick sheet of rain, or another person, they have cover.
     



      Cover
 gives you a bonus on your evade rolls, but can also cover called shot 
locations and provide hiding places. There are four degrees of cover - 
poor, light, medium, and heavy. Each degree of cover grants greater 
protection.
     



      Called
 Shot Locations: When you are behind cover, you can choose certain 
called shot locations to be covered. For example, if you’re hiding 
behind a table on its side, the table might count as medium cover and 
cover all of your called shot locations except your head (which you’re 
peeking over the table with in order to see your targets), your gun 
hand, and your arm.
     



      If
 you need a called shot location to perform an action, then you can’t 
hide it behind cover (like if you are using a heavy rifle that requires 
both hands and arms and your head to see, then you’d have to reveal all 5
 of those requisite called shot locations). When you take cover, 
describe what part of you is hiding and allow you and your narrator to 
make judgment calls as to if the location is hidden or not (but the 
ultimate decision is left to the narrator). For example, you might have 
thought only your head and eyes were exposed, but the enemy saw your 
foot sticking out and took a shot at it. That’s the narrator’s call, 
which should be making the game that much more fun.
     







      (tier 1)
     



      Poor        A post, side-table, or person
     



      Covers up to 3 called shot locations
     



      Evade: +2 on evade rolls
     







      (tier 2)
     



      Light        A bush, couch, or tree
     



      Covers up to 6 called shot locations
     



      Evade: +4 on evade rolls
     







      (tier 3)
     



      Medium        A large tree, barrel, trench, or around the corner
     



      Covers up to 9 called shot locations
     



      Evade: +6 on evade rolls
     







      (tier 4)
     



      Heavy        Around a full wall, ducked behind furniture
     



      Covers up to 11 called shot locations
     



      Evade: +8 on evade rolls
     







      Total        No portion of the person visible
     



      Covers all called shot locations
     



      Evade: Cannot be targeted
     







      Soft Cover
     



      Soft
 cover is anything that obscures an opponent’s vision but can still be 
attacked through. For instance, if you’re hiding behind dense shrubbery,
 a canvas screen, or behind a sheet, the opponent can still attack you 
through that soft cover.
     



      Soft
 cover causes the opponent to attack you blindly (taking a -4 on the 
accuracy roll). If the opponent can barely see you (like a shadow of you
 through the screen), they only take a -2 on the accuracy roll.
     



      This
 is a double-edged sword: if you can’t accurately tell how they’re 
attacking you, you suffer the same penalty on your evade roll.
     







      Taking Total Cover
     



      Cost: 1 AP (or at the end of a movement)
     



      For
 1 action point or at the end of a move, you can take full cover behind 
an object that would normally only grant medium or heavy cover. This is 
typically the act of ducking down behind the cover or pressing yourself 
against it.
     



      Once
 you’ve taken total cover, you can peek out from behind that cover and 
return for 0 action points (such as poking your head out from around a 
corner). Doing so, however, does count as “leaving cover” and allows 
enemies with ranged weapons to take reflexive attacks against you.
     







      Melee Attacks versus Cover
     



      Though
 cover is a constant concern for ranged attackers, it can be less so for
 people carrying melee weapons. While a wall can be great for peeking 
one’s head around, once that person closes in with a saber, that wall 
isn’t going to be doing much.
     



      Small
 objects (such as furniture and vegetation) can provide cover as per 
normal, but characters will often just move around larger objects (such 
as larger trees, walls, et cetera).
     







      Firing Blindly
     



      While
 taking total cover, you can always choose to fire blindly at your 
opponents. When you fire blindly, you are only revealing your hand (the 
one firing the gun, crossbow, or throwing the weapon) or hands (if 
you’re using two-handed ranged weapons or a bow). This prevents enemies 
from targeting your vital locations, as they can now only target your 
hand(s).
     



      However,
 you have difficulty aiming at the target while firing blindly. You take
 a -4 on your accuracy roll against anybody that you shoot (exactly as 
though you were blind). If you do not know where the enemy is but shoot 
in the correct direction (at your narrator’s discretion), you’ll suffer a
 -8 on the accuracy roll.
     







      Hiding Spots
     



      Hiding
 spots are locations where you can keep yourself hidden from on-lookers.
 You can use medium, heavy, or total cover as hiding spots (the action 
of hiding in a hiding spot counts as taking total cover). Once you’ve 
taken your hiding spot, people can roll to notice you or they must 
search for you.
     



      Noticing:
 Attempting to “notice” somebody is a passive action. When a character 
notices something, they did so without any real effort, without actively
 searching for what they noticed. When a person passes near another 
person’s hiding spot, they both roll Cunning (with the hiding person 
gaining a bonus based on their degree of cover). If the person walking 
by meets or exceeds the person hiding, they “notice” that there is 
somebody hiding there.
     







      Medium
 Cover        -4 on the Cunning 
roll to hide, as this degree of cover is difficult to hide behind
     



      Heavy
 Cover        No bonus on the 
Cunning roll to hide, as this degree of cover is a typical hiding spot
     



      Total
 Cover        +4 on the Cunning 
roll to hide, as this degree of cover is ideal for hiding
     







      Searching:
 Searching is a much more involved process. If someone says “I search 
behind the rock” and there somebody is hiding behind the rock, they will
 automatically find that person. The area must be specific (saying that 
one “searches the room” is not specific enough: they must say that they 
search behind the curtains and inside the closet).
     



      If
 somebody is found hiding, both parties may roll priority. The winner 
will get to act first, often times taking the chance to immediately run 
or get off a surprise attack.
     







      Precipitation & Wind
     



      Precipitation
 and wind can provide cover, as both make it more difficult to aim at 
your target. Your narrator will use his discretion when determining a 
cover bonus provided from precipitation and wind. They can also increase
 cover; for example, if you’re taking cover behind a barrel (say, medium
 cover), but it’s also hailing outside, that medium cover can suddenly 
become heavy cover.
     







      Status Effects
     



      Bleeding
     



      Any
 time you’re bleeding, you’re taking hit point damage until your hit 
points are exhausted, at which point you start taking wounds damage. 
Normally, bleeding will occur when the victim’s action points refresh 
and last until stopped. This damage cannot be soaked through normal 
defenses. Bleeding effects stack with other bleeding effects.
     



      For
 every 1 action point spent to stop bleeding, 5 bleed damage is negated.
 These action points must be spent by either the victim or a character 
adjacent to the victim.
     







      Blinded & Poor Vision
     



      When
 you’re blinded, in total darkness, or just plain can’t see your 
opponent, you take a -4 on all accuracy and evade rolls against him. If 
you’re in low levels of light, fog, or just have something in your eye, 
you take a -2 on accuracy and evade rolls.
     







      Burning
     



      When
 you are on fire, you will suffer unsoakable damage every turn, and the 
fire will damage or destroy your equipment. The fire can be put out for a
 couple action points, depending on the size of the fire.
     



      Tier
 1        This is a light flame 
such as as stepping in a campfire or a explosion’s aftermath. You take 2
 unsoakable damage per turn and items in your possession are singed but 
still functional. 2 action points will put the fire out.
     



      Tier
 2        This is a large fire, 
like from standing in a campfire or being lit by an outside source such 
as a torch. You take 4 unsoakable damage per turn and all wooden, 
organic, and cloth items in your possession are destroyed or unuseable. 4
 action points will put the fire out.
     



      Tier
 3        This is a fire fueled 
by outside means, such as oil or an alchemical source. You take 8 
unsoakable damage per turn and all leather, cloth, and wooden items in 
your possession are destroyed or unusable. 8 action points will put out 
the fire.
     



      Tier 
4        This a highly intensive
 fire caused by lava or a full inferno. You take 16 unsoakable damage 
per turn. All items in your possession, including metal ones, are 
damaged to a point of being unusable until repaired. 16 action points 
will put out the fire.
     







      Burnt
     



      Burns
 can be painful, debilitating wounds that heal very slowly. General 
burns make armor uncomfortable to wear and hits harder to soak. For 
specific call shot burns, consider giving equal penalties to abilities 
when using the burned body located.
     



      As
 an example, burned hands might make climbing or crafting intricate 
trinkets very difficult, whereas burned feet could cause a player 
trouble when attempting fancy footwork or long treks across the country.
     



      Tier
 1        You have minor burns 
on his body that make all incoming attack sting just a little bit more. 
You suffer a -1 to all defense rolls.
     



      Tier
 2        You have several 1st 
degree burns that make defending difficult. You suffer a -3 to all 
defense rolls.
     



      Tier 
3        You have major 2nd 
degree burns that hurt when you even move. You suffer a -5 to all 
defense rolls.
     



      Tier 
4        You’ve been burned 
incredibly badly. Several are 3rd degree burns, making it almost 
impossible to take a hit. You suffer a -7 to all defense rolls.
     







      Deafened
     



      While
 deafened, you suffer a -2 on evade rolls. You also take that -2 on any 
roll that requires listening, speaking, or performing a sound-based 
action.
     







      Disoriented
     



      When
 you’re disoriented, you have a hard time getting about. You lose one 
action point per turn that you are disoriented. You can re-orientate 
yourself by spending 3 action points.
     







      Drowning
     



      When
 you run out of air, make a Brute roll for each turn until you once 
again have air. The target tier for this roll begins at tier 2 and 
increases each turn until you fail, at which case you’re knocked out. 
You die within three turns of falling unconscious if you’re not rescued.
     







      Enraged
     



      Rage
 drives a person to act with one goal in mind: to destroy whatever is 
making them angry. As such, when you are enraged you suffer a -2 to all 
rolls when doing anything other than attacking whatever enraged you. You
 gain a +2 accuracy and strike when attacking the object of your rage. 
You may spend 2 action points at any time to clear your head and calm 
down, removing your rage.
     







      Fatigued
     



      When
 you’re fatigued, your maximum hit points are reduced by one half, 
rounded down. Thus, if you normally have 17 hit points but start a 
battle fatigued, you’ll start the fight with 8 hit points.
     







      Fear
     



      Fear
 comes in many forms and is caused by many things. It is an emotion of 
power that causes nations and heroes to both rise and fall. Fear is one 
of the most basic and powerful emotions in the universe, as there are 
few who truly ever overcome it and even fewer who are without it. At any
 point you may spend 1 reflexive action point to attempt to overcome 
fear. A strong willpower always overcomes fear and as such you may 
always use a spirit to resist or overcome fear. Lastly, fear only lasts 
until your next downtime.
     



      Tier
 1        Being scared by 
someone or of something is the most basic form of fear. This is the form
 of fear that comes from being intimidated by the object of fear. When 
you are scared you receive a -2 to all resist rolls. This penalty 
increases to a -4 when rolling against the source of your fear.
     



      Tier
 2        Fright has the ability
 to cause doubt in even the strongest and most skilled people. It 
consumes them and makes them act irrationally which opens them for 
mistakes. When Frightened you suffer a -2 to all rolls. This penalty 
increases to a -4 when rolling against the source of your fear.
     



      Tier
 3        When you are terrified
 you body has only one response: put as much distance between you and 
the object of your fear as possible. When you are terrified, you suffer a
 -2 to all rolls (-4 against your fear’s source) and must spend at least
 1 action point per turn moving away from the object of your fear. In 
addition, you may not move toward the object of your fear until you are 
no longer terrified.
     



      Tier 
4        True dread is sometimes
 referred to as crippling fear. It gets this reputation because those 
unfortunate enough to have experienced true dread had their basic rights
 as a sentient creature stripped from them: the ability to act. When you
 are experiencing true dread, you suffer a -4 to all rolls (-6 against 
your fear’s source) and may not do anything except when attempting to 
overcome fear (and you can spend one action point at a time to re-roll 
your resist against this effect).
     







      Nausea
     



      You’ve
 become sick to your stomach and cannot focus until it’s been dealt 
with. You receive a -2 to all rolls until 3 action points have been 
spent emptying your stomach.
     







      Paralyzed
     



      A
 paralyzed person is helpless for several turns, minutes, hours, or 
days. If paralyzed, a person cannot fight back. Any damage dealt to them
 goes straight into wounds. They cannot move, talk, or take any other 
actions (unless specified otherwise).
     







      Prone
     



      If
 you’re prone, you’re low to the ground. It requires 1 action point to 
stand from prone, which causes you to flinch (and thus draw reflexes). 
While prone, your move speed is cut down to 5 feet. You take a -1 on all
 combat rolls (accuracy, evade, strike, and defense) while prone. If 
you’re grabbed while prone, you cannot stand up until you break the 
grab.
     







      Stunned
     



      When
 somebody is stunned, they lose an indicated amount of action points 
from their immediate pool. If somebody is stunned for 1 action point, 
they lose the first available action point they have. If somebody is 
stunned for more action points than they have per turn, they cannot act 
until they have action points again.
     



      A
 stunned character is still aware of their environment and can evade and
 resist attacks, and is therefore not helpless.
     







      Battlefield Modifier
     



      Falling
     



      You
 take 1 wounds damage per 20 feet that you fall. For every tier result 
over tier 1 you receive on a Dexterity roll, you may ignore 2 wounds 
damage. (Thus, a tier 2 Dexterity roll would result in ignoring the 
first 40 feet of falling damage, and a tier 3 result would ignore the 
first 80 feet.) For every 2 wounds damage that you take from falling, 
you roll once on the wounds random effects chart.
     







      Rough Terrain
     



      Rough
 terrain can be found anywhere, Sometimes it is a mere inconvenience, 
slowing you down a notch or giving you uneven footing. Other times it 
can be virtually impassable, making you nearly crawl to get anywhere.
     



      Minor        You take a -5 to your speed.
     



      Examples: A rocking boat, a light forest
     



      Unsteady        You take a -10 to your speed.
     



      Examples: A forest, rocky terrain, snow
     



      Difficult        You take a -15 to your speed.
     



      Examples: A swamp, a snowy mountain
     



      Impossible        You take a -20 to your speed.
     



      Examples: A dense jungle, ancient rubble
     







      Note: No matter how dense or how many penalties you have to speed, you can always crawl at a 5 feet movement.
     
















      Chapter 2 - Character Creation
     



      Making a Character
     



      Many
 consider making the character to be almost more fun than actually 
playing the game. The Clockwork System uses a fast and easy way of 
character creation with the hardest part left entirely up to you: 
figuring out exactly what you want your character to be.
     



      You’ll
 need a character sheet, a twelve-sided die, and a pencil. You can find 
character sheets in the back of this book or at our website, 
CrackedMonocle.com. If you don’t have a character sheet handy, no 
worries - you should be able to get this done without one. (The 
character sheet just organizes the character and makes it easier.) Now 
that we’re ready, let’s get started.
     







      1   Race & Nationality
     



      The
 absolute foundation of your character is the race. As a character in 
Tephra, you may choose from the following races: human, ayodin, elf, 
farishtaa, gnome, or satyr. You can look up the races in Chapter 3 - 
Races. Once you select a race, your character will gain their racial 
traits.
     



      You
 will roll your twelve-sided die to determine which random racial trait 
you receive. Racial traits are background traits that you obtained 
growing up as that race. It might be a natural-born talent or have been 
caused because of something that happened to you, and that’s something 
nobody has control over. Thus, it’s random.
     



      You
 may also choose your nationality. Nationalities can be found in Chapter
 4 - Context. You can choose from Evanglessian (the most common), 
Dalvozzean, Izedan, Paldoran, or Zel Haud. After choosing your 
nationality, you can select a couple nationality stories that work for 
your character.
     







      Note to the Narrator: Choosing Traits
     



      If
 you’d like, you can allow your players to choose their no-longer-random
 traits. You could also allow players to re-roll their random trait if 
it really does not work with their character concept.
     



      Just
 be careful of allowing this. Don’t be too surprised when suddenly 
everyone in your party has their favorite traits. You, of course, have 
the final say on any of their selections, so use that control as 
necessary.
     











      2   Skills
     



      Skills
 represent your training and talents. Each skill is grouped under an 
attribute. Choose one skill: that is your primary skill at first level, 
and it gets 3 points (which means that you’ll get a +3 when rolling that
 skill). Then, choose two more skills. These are your secondary skills, 
and each of them gets 2 points. Finally, select three more skills, 
giving each 1 point.
     



      So the 
rule is simple: 3 points in one skill, 2 point in two skills, and 1 
point in three skills. You cannot place these points in the same skill -
 therefore, at first level, you’ll be placing points in a total of six 
skills.
     



      You
 can choose skills from one attribute or multiple attributes. The more 
points you have in one attribute, the greater that attribute is going to
 be. On the other hand, if you’re more spread out, you’ll be better at 
doing multiple things.
     







      3   Attributes
     



      Where
 skills are the sprinkles on your sundae, attributes are the ice cream. 
You can determine your attributes very easily - simply add up all of the
 skills under an attribute, and that’s your attribute score. Done!
     







      4   Specialties
     



      Now
 that you’ve placed your skills and attributes, you can choose your 
specialties. You choose three specialties at first level, and you will 
gain one specialty every level thereafter.
     



      Specialties
 are character defining abilities, allowing you to do amazing things. 
Specialties are found under skills. If you want an agility specialty, 
for example, you flip to the Agility page and peruse those specialties.
     



      You
 can only choose a specialty if you have at least one point in the skill
 that the specialty falls under, so your best bet to find fitting 
specialties is to look under the skills that you have points in - the 
more points you have in a skill, the better you’re going to be at using 
your specialties that come from that skill.
     



      Specialty
 Bonuses: Each specialty has a couple bonuses, or “combat statistics,” 
that it rewards the player with. When you take a specialty, mark down on
 the back of your character sheet any bonuses that the specialty grants 
you.
     







      Acc:        Accuracy
     



      Eva:        Evade
     



      Stk:        Strike
     



      Def:        Defense
     



      Pri:        Priority
     



      Spd:        Speed
     



      Aug:        Augment
     



      DIY:        Do-it-Yourself
     



      Wnd:        Wound
     



      HP:        Hit Points
     











      5   Augments
     



      If you have any augments from your specialties, go ahead and select them now.
     



      Every
 time a specialty grants you an augment, you get to choose an augment 
under a Sciences skill (such as Alchemy, Armsmith, Engineer, and 
Gadgetry) that you have points in and learn it. Once you’ve learned the 
augment, you can craft it into an item at any time. You may choose an 
augment regardless of the amount of slots it takes up. To learn more 
about crafting and augments, turn to Chapter 10 - Sciences.
     







      6   Weapons & Armors
     



      You
 now get to choose your weapons. Weapons are largely chosen based on 
their size and damage class. If you’d like a one-handed sword, go for a 
medium melee weapon. If you’d like an elephant gun, go for a heavy 
rifle. Each size deals a set amount of damage. Weapons, found in Chapter
 5 - Gear, fully explains your options.
     



      Your
 accuracy and strike are determined by bonuses from your specialties. If
 the weapon has anything special about it, feel free to put that in the 
Notes section. You can name your weapon whatever you want, from “sword” 
to “meat cleaver” to “Lord Hazard’s Razor-Edged Lance of Destruction,” 
if that’s what you get kicks out of.
     



      Now
 select your armor. Just like with weapons, armor comes in light, 
medium, and heavy categories. Your evade and defense are determined by 
bonuses from your specialties. There’s a page for armor and shields 
right after where you chose your weapons.
     







      7   Gear
     



      You’re
 almost finished, so now you get a reward: you get to go shopping! For a
 beginning character, you may select anything from the Starting Gear 
list in Chapter 5 - Gear. There is no stiff limit on how much gear you 
can have when you begin. Instead, just select what you feel your 
character would be carrying on them. Of course, we assume that you’ll be
 logical and not try to carry ten tents on your person.
     



      Once
 you’ve selected your equipment, go ahead and give yourself 10 princes 
(as pocket cash).
     







      Note to the Narrator: Altering Starting Cash
     



      You
 are more than welcome to give the players more or less to start off 
with. Many narrators will start characters with no pocket cash and 
little more than a revolver with the six rounds in the chamber. Or, if 
you’d like, you can give them mansions full of equipment and call them 
rich nobles. It’s your saga - feel free to re-write it.
     











      8   Derived Statistics
     



      Finish filling in the statistics for your character sheet.
     



      You have 3 action points (AP) at first level.
     



      Your
 speed is based on your race’s normal speed (generally 25 feet) plus any
 bonuses from your specialties.
     



      Your priority is based on bonuses granted from specialties.
     



      Unless your race says otherwise, you’ll start off with 12 wounds.
     



      Your
 hit points are entirely determined from your specialty-granted combat 
statistics.
     







      9   Stories
     



      Later
 in Chapter 4 - Context, you’ll find a number of background stories. 
These “stories” are bits and pieces of your character’s background that 
have left an effect on your character. We encourage you to choose a 
background story when you first create your character.
     







      10   The Tasty Stuff
     



      Now
 it’s up to you to figure out all of the important roleplaying aspects 
of your character. Choose your character’s name, how your character 
looks and acts, how they carry themselves, and what matters in their 
life. Give your character a personality and let your new character 
really come to life!
     











      Leveling Up
     



      There
 are twelve levels a character can progress through, and it takes twelve
 experience points to level. Once a person has that twelfth experience 
point, the character goes to the next level. It’s just like a clock.
     



      At
 every level after first, your skills go up and you gain a specialty. 
Leveling up is pretty easy - just use this list:
     




       Place 2 points in any 1 skill
      



       Place 1 point in any 2 other skills
      



       Add the skills grouped under an attribute to determine your new attribute score
      



       Learn 1 new specialty
      



       Apply that specialty’s granted bonuses
      



       Action Point Increase: If you’re reaching 4th, 8th, or 12th level, your action points per turn increase by 1
      








      Level 1                3 AP
     



      Level 4                4 AP
     



      Level 8                5 AP
     



      Level 12        6 AP
     







      Starting at a Higher Level
     



      At
 the discretion of your narrator, you and your fellow adventurers can 
create your characters at higher experience levels. Perhaps you’re all 
playing highly experienced government agents or even heroes of legend. 
When building a character at a level higher than 1st level, build your 
character at 1st level as per normal and then level them up once at a 
time. (This same system is used when you rise multiple levels at a 
time.) As a higher level character, you’ll start out with a little more 
pocket money, as per the chart to the right.
     







      Starting Princes by Level:
     



      1        10 princes
     



      2        18 princes
     



      3        32 princes
     



      4        58 princes
     



      5        105 princes
     



      6        190 princes
     



      7        340 princes
     



      8        615 princes
     



      9        1,100 princes
     



      10        2,000 princes
     



      11        3,570 princes
     



      12        6,425 princes
     







      Retrofitting
     



      Sometimes
 you’ll build a character but later decide that a specialty you chose 
just isn’t something you use. You may also run into that problem with 
augments or other aspects of your character. When this happens, you feel
 the need to retrofit your character.
     



      Retrofitting
 Specialties: You may retrofit one specialty every time you gain an 
action point (thus, at levels 4, 8, and 12). You may delete one 
specialty and gain a new one. However, that new specialty must fall in 
the same attribute as the previous specialty.
     



      Retrofitting
 Augments: You may retrofit one augment every time you learn a new 
augment. However, the replacement must come from the same skill as the 
one being replaced.
     







      Note to the Narrator: Further Retrofitting
     



      While
 we generally don’t encourage it, players may sometimes ask to retrofit a
 character outside of our listed rules. To what extent that they do so 
is up to you, and you have full control over any retrofitting they do. 
If they can make a valid case for the retrofitting, let them - let’s 
face it, nobody wants to play a character they don’t like.
     



      Just
 try not to let them completely destroy or rearrange their character 
concept.
     








      Chapter 3 - Races
     



      Racial Traits
     



      Every
 race has a handful of racial traits. When you choose your race, you 
gain those racial traits. You also get to randomly determine a unique 
racial trait. Roll your die. The number is applied to the Random Racial 
Traits chart.
     







      Humans
     



      Humans
 have spread quickly across the continent, originally as the powerful 
Haudi Empire, now as Evangless and the many other human nations. Humans 
have set the standard on development and industry, and their touch can 
be found in every corner of Tephra.
     



      Long
 ago, the Haudi Empire rose quickly, conquering all known lands and 
enslaving the other races. The Haudi Empire remained stable for several 
centuries and made much progress during its time. They enslaved the 
gentle and mysterious gnomes, and, with their help, bio-engineered 
numerous creatures, the most successful of which being the satyrs - a 
goat-legged people who would soon become a race in their own right.
     



      But
 the Haudi Empire did not last. Now the Hauds are segmented across the 
continent, most still claiming loyalty to their Empress. But the sun has
 faded on their once overwhelming might.
     



      In
 the past century, Evangless has risen to prominence. With the help of 
their legendary founder, Velkya, Evangless pioneered the steam engine 
and raised the first modern metropolises. Though it’s doubted that 
they’ll ever reach the breadth of the Haudi Empire, Evangless spans the 
width of the continent, reaching from the west coast to the east.
     



      While
 humans are transitioning, they are also quickly learning. Following the
 recent Hurricane Wars with the underwater ayodins, the humans have 
learned the trick to true flight and taken to the skies.
     



      While
 human society is thriving, it is doing so at a price. The metropolises 
of humanity are surrounded by the pollution of the so-called “cities of 
ash” where industry has taken over. Abundance is the name of the age, 
and technology is growing every day. And humans will do everything they 
can to stay at the forefront of it all.
     







      Traits of a Human
     



      Speed:
 You have the average 25 foot movement speed. You have a swim speed of 
15 feet and a climbing speed of 15 feet.
     







      Choose any two of the following
     



      Favored
 Attribute: Choose one attribute. Whenever you roll a 1 with that 
attribute, you may add your bonuses to the attribute. (This does not 
apply to the skills under that attribute.)
     



      Innovative:
 You gain +1 DIY and +2 augments. (You should only choose this option if
 you are starting off with a craft.)
     



      Peerless:
 Normally, the aggressor or instigator wins on all ties. You, however, 
always win on tied rolls.
     



      Relentless:
 You start with three more hit points. With every specialty you take, 
you gain 1 more hit point.
     







      Random Racial Traits
     



      1        Accustomed
 to the Dark: Fighting in dark conditions doesn’t frustrate you as much 
as others. You take no penalties for fighting in poor lighting 
conditions. Blindness and other environmental circumstances affect you 
normally.
     



      2        Adaptable:
 Extreme environments barely bother you. You take no penalties for 
extreme heat, cold, humidity, or other such environmental effects due to
 your surrounding area. (But if you’re hit by a glob of lava, it still 
hurts you normally.)
     



      3        Easily
 Reoriented: Always keeping a level head, you can easily regain your 
bearings when disoriented. If you are disoriented, you may spend 1 AP to
 reorient yourself rather than the normal 3 AP.
     



      4        Emotionally
 Driven: Your loyalty, your rage, your passion: these emotions will pull
 you through your worst moments. When a friend is endangered, you cannot
 begin a battle fatigued.
     



      5        Great
 Height: You are taller than other humans, giving you more power behind 
your attacks. You gain a +2 to strike.
     



      6        Hardy
 & Stout: People know that it’s going to take a lot to take you 
down. You have 6 extra hit points.
     



      7        Momentum:
 Even in the seemingly calm moments, your blood never stops boiling. 
When you know you are about to take part in a battle, you gain a +5 on 
your priority. (You do not gain this bonus when ambushed.)
     



      8        Monkey’s
 Uncle: Evolutionists claim that humankind descended from apes, and you 
do nothing to prove them wrong. Your climb speed increases by 10 feet.
     



      9        Perceptive:
 You are quick to notice your environment. Whenever rolling Cunning to 
notice something, add a +4 on to your result.
     



      10        Quick
 Feet: You’re fast…really fast. Your movement speed across land is 35 
feet instead of 25 feet.
     



      11        Reactionary:
 You can quickly assess and react to a situation. You gain a +3 on all 
priority rolls, even when taken off-guard.
     



      12        Ruckus
 Rowser: You raise people up, exciting them. Sometimes that’s good, 
sometimes that’s bad. You gain a +4 bonus on Cunning rolls when 
attempting to intimidate or provoke a person.
     







      Ayodin
     



      Physiology
     



      The
 ayodin often look tiny and frail to humans, who stand on average half a
 foot taller than them.They are long and sleek-bodied, with legs and 
arms that extend further than a human’s would. Ayodins’ nail-less 
fingers and toes are quite long, and some ayodin have toxins that run 
through their fingertips that are not unlike those of jellyfish.
     



      The
 most immediately noticeable feature, their wings, extend from their 
mid-back and shoulder blades upward. On land, these look like folded-in 
batwings. Underwater, however, they extend outwards, behind them, and 
between each of their wing’s phalanges is a thin, colorful membrane 
often compared with that of a jellyfish. These wing-fins are very strong
 and deceptively light. Ayodin can support their bodies on their wings 
if they so choose. Fully extended, an ayodin can bring its height up to 
over ten feet tall.
     



      Their
 faces are much like that of other races, and they can breath air as any
 other people. Small fins surround their faces, and these fins will 
stand up or lie back depending on their mood. Psychologists have noted 
how the ayodin keep their faces almost frighteningly passive, while 
their facial fins make them the most expressive race in the world (if 
you know how to read the signs).
     



      Ayodin
 come in a miraculous spectrum of colors. The freshwater ayodin are 
typically more mellow toned, with lighter hues of blue and sea-green, 
colors that blend in well to the water. The deeper, oceanic ayodin are 
often more brightly colored, with orange stripes, black skin, green 
spots, or any other colors imaginable. Ayodin historians claim that 
color-evolution happens quickly among the ayodin people, with the skin 
color of grandparents looking nothing like that of their grandchildren.
     



      Ayodin
 have gills on the underside of their ribcage. Due to discomfort, they 
rarely cover these gills, so their clothes tend to be shaped like 
harnesses or cover only their upper torso, leaving their abdomens 
exposed.
     



      Lifespans:
 Ayodin live just slightly longer than humans, occasionally living as 
long as a full century. They reach maturity a little sooner as well, 
with most ayodin being considered adults by they time they’re just past 
ten years old.
     







      Psychology
     



      Ayodin
 are renowned for their calm, their willingness to let things happen and
 then react. They let themselves get pushed, and then push back tenfold.
 These reactions cause people to reconsider their initial impressions of
 the “mild-mannered” ayodin.
     



      Ayodin
 are very soft-spoken, having lived their lives underwater where the 
sound carries easier. Ayodin who have lived on land for quite some time 
adjust their voices to match those around them, but most ayodin will 
still speak quietly. Ayodin are rarely talkers, and instead are a people
 of action. To them, unnecessary communication is just that: 
unnecessary.
     



      The
 vast majority of ayodin live underwater. Their habitats range greatly, 
from coral reefs to island-sides to the dark depths. Ayodin grow to 
prefer one style of water over others, be it saline or fresh, high 
pressure or low, lit or dark. Ayodin that live on land always live near 
the coast or on a river.
     



      Ayodin
 have mixed relations with every race. Many ayodin nations have declared
 war against ships in their territories, and these underwater nations 
are nearly impossible for cartographers to map out. This causes some 
major problems for shippers, and every race has run into issues with 
territorial ayodins.
     



      Ayodin
 can find kinship and differences with all of the races. They get along 
well with gnomes (who they left largely unscathed during the Hurricane 
Wars) and, surprisingly, Hauds. Since the Hurricane Wars, relations 
between the oceanic ayodin and Zelhost have openly blossomed, as each 
people find the other equally respectful. Ayodin will tolerate satyrs, 
but they have the most personality clashes.
     







      Roleplaying Tips
     



      There
 are a couple key things to remember when roleplaying an ayodin. 
Foremost, ayodin are quieter than other races. This can be difficult in 
some groups, but try talking a lot and not caring if you’re disregarded.
 Eventually, the rest of the group will clue in and start listening. 
People instinctively want to listen to a person who’s not talking 
loudly. And don’t be afraid to be a little creepy.
     



      Yet,
 while you’re soft-spoken, remember to return any abuse you take. Ayodin
 may seem calm (and they are), but they’re calm in that “C’mon, keep on 
pushing, I dare you” sort of way. When nobody expects it, push back.
     



      You
 are from the ocean, so your views on things may be a little alien. Feel
 free to play with this if you’re fresh out of the sea - maybe you don’t
 recognize some metals, or you’re still largely unfamiliar with the 
concepts of open flame. Ayodin will also be territorial of bodies of 
water, so have some fun with that.
     







      Sample Adventurers
     



      Below are three ayodin adventurers that you can use as inspiration when creating your own.
     







      Frost
     



      Frost
 grew up in a small lakeside village in Evangless, where he spent most 
of his time trading with nearby Evanglessian establishments. He was 
quick to pick up the language, as well as a couple others from traveling
 merchants, and became his village’s spokesperson. He became quite 
familiar with currency and enlisted to become his village’s Trust 
representative. One summer, a chemical company up-river started dumping 
its wastes into the water supply, and many things went sour for Frost’s 
village. He found little that he could do, and - upset - took matters 
into his own hands. After breaking into the company and sabotaging their
 operations, it was all Frost could do to escape with his life.
     



      Now
 Frost makes his living doing side-work, scams, and using his knowledge 
of the Evanglessian monetary system to make his own living. His run in 
with the chemical company taught him a lot about the thrill and anxiety 
of breaking the law, and its an addiction he fears he might soon bend 
to.
     



      Frost
 would probably have the following specialties: Distract (under 
Showmanship), Distracting Attack (under Espionage), and Weak Point 
(under Expertise).
     







      Roiza Stormwings
     



      Roiza
 was in one of the few ayodin clans to migrate north into Dalvozzea, the
 nation of elves and farishtaas. She grew up in the seedier side of 
Daion (Dalvozzea’s capital) until she was hired as a mercenary for a 
farishtaa noble. She served him for years and eventually gained his 
personal interest. The farishtaa took Roiza flying with him in his 
collection of ironbirds, and Roiza fell in love with the sensation 
immediately.
     



      Though
 Roiza would eventually leave the employ of the farishtaa, she hadn’t 
yet had enough of flying. She’s now an adventurer for hire, known for 
her skill in the air and on the ground. She’s used to being surrounded 
by creatures much bigger and stronger than her (having grown up among 
elves), and has the personality to back it up.
     



      Roiza
 Stormwings would probably have the following specialties: Free Movement
 (under Agility), Driving with Knees (under Ace), and Fight Anywhere 
(under Swashbuckling).
     







      Vish’qua
     



      Vish’qua
 is a tough oceanic ayodin who has only recently come to the surface. 
Though he’s a bit young to have fought in the Hurricane Wars, he knew 
quite a few people who did, and he lost his father in the war with 
Tordryon to the north. While he doesn’t respect most of the surface 
dwellers, his mother and sister fled to the surface near the end of the 
war. Now he follows, searching for them.
     



      He
 came brashly, and he probably would not have survived without the care 
of some freshwater ayodin (aid which he begrudgingly took). After 
regaining his strength, he left them to start searching, but has few 
clues to lead him forward.
     



      Vish’qua
 would probably have the following specialties: Merciless (under 
Frenzy), Parting Waves (under Grace), and Thick Skin (under Resilience).
     







      Sample NPCs
     



      Below are three ayodin non-player characters (NPCs) that a group of adventurers might run into on their travels.
     







      Ambra No-Fins
     



      After
 the Hurricane Wars, many oceanic ayodin came to Aldamiir, looking for a
 new home. They claim that they were cast out of their homeland and told
 to join their cowardly freshwater brethren on the shore. One of them, 
Ambra, had her fins torturously stripped of her before being exiled, and
 now works as fishmonger in the lower districts of Aldamiir. She’s a 
strong woman, and many believe that she was a warrior during the wars. 
Today she makes little and is treated poorly, but what she does make she
 saves, hoping one day to have enough that she can find some way of 
regaining both her wing-fins and her pride.
     







      Mikhail
     



      A
 true mesh of cultures, Mikhail was raised along the riverbank in the 
Evanglessian capital of Razule. He grew up without much in his pocket or
 his stomach. So when he came of age, Mikhail combined his knowledge of 
being a big city criminal with his family’s knowledge of the open seas, 
taking a profession that suited him wonderfully: piracy. Borrowing a 
skiff and taking his small-time gang of thugs out on the high seas, this
 amphibious buccaneer sees no fear in going down with his ship. Cold and
 merciless to those he raids, he isn’t known for taking prisoners.
     







      Quadan
     



      Living
 in an oceanview apartment in the Evanglessian city of Qui, Quadan is a 
successful merchant who brings the sights of the ocean’s floor to 
land-dwellers. His primary trade is selling beautiful seashells and 
other baubles of the sea to tourists. Known for his ayodin stoicism, 
attempting to barter with this avid poker player will get you nowhere. 
Amicable and talkative, nothing ever flusters this jovial entrepreneur.
     







      Excerpt from the 842 Census
     



      20 Most Common Male Names
     



      Seath,
 Kova, Awuli, Holshin, Vasha, Zilya, Caradoq, Shiyal, Eiran, Gwydion, 
Iyoan, Myrddin, Meris, Kye, Frost, Roqui, Merkhan, Krovi, Quadan, Broj
     







      20 Most Common Female Names
     



      Tetra,
 Celebes, Gilkoroh, Angel, Molli, Ziema, Brina, Geadal, Coral, Kemara, 
Ira, Akacia, Calantha, Delphine, Krysanthe, Linnea, Xeni, Thalassa, 
Cliyona, Winter
     







      Note:
 This pool of names was taken from freshwater ayodin. Though no official
 data has been collected, oceanic ayodin names tend to be more unusual 
and include syllables difficult for other Tephrans to pronounce. There 
has been a trend among freshwater ayodin in combining their ancestral 
names with common human names they live near.
     







      Ayodin Religions
     



      Though
 the ayodin believe in many things, and to classify any small sampling 
as “ayodin religions” would be a disservice to the numerous beliefs 
found underwater, there are a couple religions that are well known to 
the surface dwellers. The two most prevalent are Harabe Mavi and the 
followers of Saint Gilkoroh.
     







      Harabe Mavi
     



      The
 traditional faith amongst many ayodin, those who believe in Harabe Mavi
 believe that in ancient times ayodin lived on the surface with other, 
now-extinct races. While the ayodin were a righteous people, the other 
races were sinful and murderous. Aeon, the moon goddess, saw how the 
other races preyed upon the proud ayodin. In retribution, Aeon crashed 
the moon into Tephra, wiping out all life on the surface. To protect the
 ayodin, she gave them fins and gills so they could swim to the ocean’s 
deepest depths in order to avoid the blast. Modern members of Harabe 
Mavi believe the surface belongs to the ayodin, since it was theirs 
until the moon’s impact forced them into the water.
     



      In
 many ways, Harabe Mavi is considered ancient lore in ayodin culture 
more than it is a religion. So many take it for fact that it is rarely 
debated as a tenant of belief and is instead left to historians to 
understand it.
     



      Harabe
 Mavi was one of the leading factors in declaring war upon the surface, 
which is why so many on the surface know of the religion.
     







      Path of Gilkoroh
     



      Saint
 Gilkoroh was a righteous ayodin woman who spent her life doing good 
works and reaching out to unite the warring ayodin clans with the the 
surface world. In her prime, she was known as a resolute warrior who 
safeguarded those she swam with. Among the speakers of Harabe Mavi, she 
was well respected. Leading up to the Hurricane Wars, Gilkoroh spoke out
 against the planned invasion of the surface. She was found, dead and 
battered, months before the Hurricane Wars would begin.
     



      Her
 martyrdom led to a fracturing of Harabe Mavi, and those who followed 
her became known as the Path of Gilkoroh. Some touted that Gilkoroh was 
the avatar of Aeon, the traditional moon goddess of Harabe Mavi. It was 
the followers of the Path and their kin that exiled themselves and 
became the freshwater ayodin.
     



      Followers
 of the Path believe that everyone should have a fair chance at 
protecting themselves in time of crisis. Though many in the Path are 
pacifists, others believe that the Path simply requires a warning 
against aggression. For example, assassins who believe in her teachings 
carry an extra weapon on them for their prey, so as to give them an 
opportunity to protect themselves for fear that Gilkoroh or her ethereal
 servants, called Korohs, will smite them for their misdeeds.
     







      Technology of the Deep
     



      The
 Ayodin Exodus of 826 led to many technological advances on the surface.
 The ayodin had long ago learned of graviton spheres and were using them
 to control their vehicles’ depths. A few years after the Hurricane Wars
 began, graviton spheres would be successfully used in airships, 
ushering in a new era of airborne travel.
     



      Ayodin
 are masters of water manipulation and travel. The ayodin have rerouted 
entire underwater currents to create ocean highways. The Hurricane Wars 
were called such because of their ability to shift the tides, and, to a 
lesser extent, weather patterns.
     



      Ayodin
 have found ways of creating flames underwater, building air-piping from
 the surface that leads down to enclosed workspaces. Solid-form alchemy 
was created a few decades ago, as liquid alchemy of the surface found 
little place underwater. Coral, stone, and fish-warping has continued to
 be the primary source of tools for the ayodin, though many new advances
 have been found.
     



      The
 ayodin use a currency system remarkably similar to that on land (though
 the currency was never converted to paper money). As such, it’s not 
difficult for ayodin settlements to trade and barter with surface 
dwellers.
     







      Traits of an Ayodin
     



      Amphibious: You can breathe both on land and in water.
     



      Speed:
 You have the average 25 foot movement speed. You have a swim speed of 
35 feet, and a climbing speed of 15 feet.
     



      Versatile
 Wing-Fins: Your wing-fins grant you a limberness to movement that few 
other races can cope with. You gain a +1 on evade rolls.
     











      Random Racial Traits
     



      1        Blindsense:
 You have developed a limited sense of echolocation. You can see with 
your ears just as well as you see with your eyes. As long as you aren’t 
deafened, you can see regardless of lighting conditions.
     



      2        Born
 in the Seas: None are as comfortable as you are while swimming. Your 
swimming speed increases by 10 feet.
     



      3        Built-in
 Bulwark: You’ve become accustomed to defending against attacks through 
superior use of your fins. Your fins can act as shields (allowing you to
 use them for deflections).
     



      4        Expressive
 Flair: Your facial fins lend themselves to your expressions, giving you
 an exuberance and range of expressions that few can match. You gain a 
+3 on Cunning rolls whenever attempting to convince or change people’s 
emotions.
     



      5        Inner
 Silence: The crashing of waves has no effect upon your inner calm. You 
are beyond fear. You gain a +2 on Cunning rolls whenever under duress or
 being intimidated or provoked.
     



      6        Master
 Diving: Ayodins pioneered graviton technology, and so in turn had to 
learn how to safely dive back into water when they fell off a 
high-flying graviton airship. You take no falling damage regardless of 
how far you fall as long as you land in water.
     



      7        Natural
 Touch: Utilizing the poison your fingertips excrete, your unarmed 
strikes have a damage class of 3.
     



      8        Passive:
 Your inner calm and carefree demeanor allow you to let most problems 
simply roll off your back. You gain a +4 on your spirit rolls when using
 it as a resist.
     



      9        Powerful
 Paralysis: The poison in your touch slows its target’s reaction time. 
Whenever you touch somebody, they suffer a -3 on their next evade roll 
(this penalty will go away at the end of their next turn if not 
expended).
     



      10        Terror
 from the Deep: At the ocean’s deepest depths it is too dark to attack 
enemies at a distance. You have learned to fight ferociously at close 
range. You gain a +3 on strike rolls when attacking a foe adjacent to 
you.
     



      11        Vanguard:
 Ayodin culture breeds warriors who remain calm even in the most chaotic
 of battles. Your impassive attitude keeps your adjacent allies 
level-headed, granting them a +2 on evade rolls. This effect does not 
stack with multiple holders of this story.
     



      12        Wings
 as Arms: Your wings are strong enough to hold one-handed items in them.
 You cannot use them to hold anything two-handed even if you try to use 
both.
     







      Elves
     



      Elves aren’t your typical fallen angels.
     



      Ancient
 murals depict the elves as upstanding, strong individuals that tower 
over all other races. Angelic, their skin shined like the sun, with 
great feathered wings and halos. The religion of Jinzium teaches that 
elves were once the rightful rulers of Tephra but lost favor with the 
gods. Though the exact details are lost, the effects are obvious: today,
 elves are warped, bruise-colored creatures that survive meagerly in the
 forests. Some elves say their souls are fractured as punishment for 
their ancestors’ hubris. With the recent rise of the farishtaas, 
scientists are beginning to agree with the sentiment.
     



      Elves
 are noble beings, haunted by a reputation that pins them as being 
inferior to the other races. Their reputation paints them as slow, 
uncivilized creatures of the forest, but the stereotypes have been 
proven false time and time again. Elves, roaming the vast plains and 
building their towns in deep jungles, are the oldest race of Tephra. 
Though their society is not as advanced as that of the other races, 
elves are content being among the best agriculturalists and hunters in 
the world. The comprehension of the natural world rivals that of even 
the gnomes, though - unlike the gnomes - elves are less prone to 
changing the world’s course.
     







      Physiology
     



      Elves
 have enormous bodies more than capable of withstanding tough living in 
the wilderness. They build muscle rapidly, and even the most lethargic 
of elves will still be powerful beings. Elves have long arms, and many 
elves have an almost gorilla-like stoop. (A few elves develop the habit 
of knuckle-walking, though it’s an old trait that most elves have 
stopped doing.) Elves will comfortably stand around six and a half feet 
tall. Sometimes  elves who are surrounded by humans and farishtaas 
will force their posture more upright, making them both significantly 
taller and much more intimidating. Elves will weigh, on average, fifty 
to a hundred pounds more than humans of the same size.
     



      Elves
 have long, narrow faces and great pointed ears which extend to be over a
 foot long. Their skin is dark, the color often compared to the full 
spectrum of human bruising. Elves have eyes that are bright and primal, 
composed of dozens of fiery hues. Their hair comes in many shades, from 
the pale colors of their angelic ancestors to pitch black. It is 
typically dry and rough hair, and it grows low onto their back. They 
otherwise grow relatively little body hair.
     



      Lifespans:
 Elves live to be around 80 to 90 years old, though some grow 
significantly older. Elves grow fast and reach adulthood within twelve 
years.
     



      Psychology
     



      Elves
 have an innate understanding of the world and nature, but thanks to the
 discriminations of most major civilizations, almost all elves forego 
what would be considered “book-smarts.” Exceptions do arise. If it 
weren’t for the acclaimed elven scholar Girazza, the scientific marvel 
known as farishtaas would have never come to be, as Girazza pioneered 
the science of bio-flux especially in regards to essence manipulation.
     



      Elves
 are noble and caring beings, loyal to a fault. They can be quick to 
anger when their loved ones are threatened; an angry elf (especially one
 carrying something heavy and bladed) can be a scary sight indeed! Elves
 enjoy beauty and colors. Farishtaas, who adorn themselves with blacks 
and whites, find the elves to be gaudy. Elves collect brightly colored 
stones and decorate themselves with them.
     



      Many
 elves are acutely aware of what they were. The surviving murals and 
statues of their ancient angelic civilization act as constant reminders 
for elves. This is why it has been so easy for farishtaas to convince 
the elves that they are there to help, to rescue, and to re-enlighten 
the elves. It is propaganda that the elves embrace, hoping to return to 
their former glory. Elves who line themselves up to become farishtaa 
know the risks involved, but they see the end result and how much 
happier their former elven comrades have become in their post-conversion
 life. They live in denial of the fact that the process replaces them 
with a different-yet-similar person.
     



      It
 is a common misconception that all elves live in deep jungles. The 
largest elven cities taken over by the farishtaas were, indeed, in the 
jungles and forests of central Rilausia, yet elves can be found in most 
temperate environments, commonly on large plains and sometimes in more 
hilly or mountainous areas. Some elves, such as the Sunrage Elves in 
Izeda, live in the harshest parts of the desert.
     



      Among
 the other races, farishtaas have ensured that other peoples see elves 
as nothing more than inferior brutes. However, gnomes and satyrs have 
stayed especially fond of elves and get along with them famously. Elves 
are often seen as dangerous and disruptive due to their size; however, 
elves are never mistrusted. Most people see elves as incapable of 
betrayal.
     







      Excerpt from the 842 Census
     



      20 Most Common Male Names
     



      Phlox,
 Balam, Ahpel, Wej, Sugnil, Yanluk, Acat, Sorrell, Qahlom, Berilo, 
Kalani, Ciyopa, Cedar, Tamarack, Dalzik, Itzamna, Rycrafi, Suufild, 
Kawil, Hevel
     







      20 Most Common Female Names
     



      Kelan,
 Axani, Chloris, Nurit, Ruflina, Suri, Zahra, Audhel, Vanora, Aximelka, 
Korvili, Enfys, Amitola, Hadassah, Tirzah, Elysia, Elodie, Vallombrosa, 
Eilat, Brier
     











      Roleplaying Tips
     



      There
 are a couple primary options for roleplaying an elf. Some will play an 
elf as a noble, intelligent creature fighting against the slander of his
 race. On the other end, some people will choose to play them like a 
strong but dumb brute. Many people will play intelligent elves just to 
contradict society’s unfounded stereotypes, and some will play elves who
 have lost loved ones through farishtaa conversion, just for the unique 
roleplaying opportunities.
     



      An
 important decision for any elf is their stance on farishtaa. Some elves
 see farishtaa as the next stage of life and evolution, while others see
 the sacrifice necessary to make the change as an abomination of nature.
 This varies from elf to elf.
     







      Sample Adventurers
     



      Below are three elven adventurers that you can use as inspiration when creating your own.
     



      Acholata
     



      Raised
 as a silent huntress, Acholata grew up eating only what she could catch
 or kill with one of her arrows. As she grew she became one of her 
tribes premiere huntresses and would often led the hunt. One winter, her
 brother Hikano left the tribe with enough spare coin to become a 
farishtaa. She received a letter a few months later from Zevhel, a newly
 converted farishtaa - her brother’s new personality. The letter invited
 her to Cyronia, where he would pay for her to undergo the 
transformation.
     



      Acholata
 joined her new brother, Zevhel, in Cyronia. Over the few days she spent
 with him, she grew disgusted. Zevhel was living a life of filth and 
nothing remained of Hikano, her beloved brother. She vowed never to 
become a farishtaa, and she scorns all those who make the mistake.
     



      Today,
 Acholata has experienced too much of Dalvozzea and the hold that the 
farishtaas have over the nation. She’s ventured south, to Evangless, to 
put her skills to the test. Surely, she thought, a proven huntress and 
archer could find a way of living in the civilized world.
     



      Acholata
 would probably have the following specialties: Efficient Ranger (under 
Marksmanship), Phase Step (under Agility), and Still as Stone (under 
Shamanism).
     



      Dalzik
     



      Dalzik
 has always been a freedom fighter. When he was younger his Highborne 
parents paid for him to undergo the farishtaa conversion process, but 
either something went wrong with the machine or his body rejected it and
 Dalzik remained an elf. He took that as a sign. Strong-willed and with 
some princes in his pocket, he took the best swordsmanship classes he 
could in the Daion universities, and, when Girazza rebelled during the 
Night of Feathers, joined in the fray (not that he had anything 
specifically against the farishtaa government). After getting a taste of
 fun, he went west, helping free satyr slaves in Siyesh, and thereafter 
went south to Evangless, where he mingled with the Tharmurians and 
gnomes who fell under the Evanglessian rule.
     



      Part
 adventure seeker, part freedom fighter, Dalzik is a rebel without a 
cause. He’s constantly looking for something to do, some trouble to 
create, and he’s quite adept at getting people stirred up and getting 
fights going. And he’ll do it all with a smile.
     



      Dalzik
 would probably have the following specialties: Ace up my Sleeve (under 
Luck), Opening (under Swashbuckling), and Throw Off Balance (under 
Showmanship).
     



      Wej
     



      Some
 elves wonder how they got the reputation for being dumb brutes. Then 
they meet Wej. Wej was born in a small tribe in southern Dalvozzea and 
grew up as a hunter. Much of his tribe migrated to Daion, a city that 
Wej always felt completely out of place in. That is, until Wej got into a
 tussle with a couple outraged mercenaries. That’s when Wej found his 
place in the world (and proved it to everyone else in the pub): Wej was 
destined to bring people together. Through violence and broken skulls.
     



      Wej
 would probably have the following specialties: Adrenaline Surge (under 
Frenzy), Keep them Down (under Overpower), and Fluid (under Brawl).
     







      Sample NPCs
     



      Below are three elven non-player characters (NPCs) that a group of adventurers might run into on their travels.
     



      Enfys
     



      Enfys
 is a lady-in-waiting in the white towers of Daion. For several years, 
she was employed as a waitress at a well-to-do restaurant in the 
undercanopy of Daion. She became the favorite waitress of a farishtaa, 
and, a few months later, was offered a cushy job working above the 
canopy. Despite her improved position, Enfys has little love for her 
employer and receives a lot of information about his sometimes seedy 
dealings. If adventurers were to pull her aside and ask her to spill 
some private information about her farishtaa master, it wouldn’t be a 
first for her.
     



      Phlox
     



      Emulating
 his ancestors’ nomadic lifestyle and leaving civilization behind, Phlox
 and his small band of elven comrades live as hunters in the High 
Rilausian Forest. Hidden from view in the trees above and armed with 
little more than a sharpened stick, Phlox has shut out all memory of his
 life as an indentured servant in the service of a farishtaa merchant. 
While he misses the hustle and bustle of the city, the elf’s wild spirit
 refuses to be tied down on cramped city streets any longer.
     



      Professor Berilo
     



      As
 Professor Berilo looks out into the crowd of new students at the onset 
of each semester, he reflects on the trials he underwent on the road to 
attaining his degree in alchemy. The Evanglessian university he attended
 had received few applications from elves, much less seen one attain his
 doctorate. Of course, as a Highborne and with his resumé, there was no 
way they could refuse him. Even now he sees students looking at him with
 disgust or confusion. No matter; just like everyone, they will be in 
awe of him after his lecture on acids.
     











      Anti-Elven Prejudices
     



      Elves
 are the most common victims of undue prejudice in Tephra. Their 
grotesque appearance and massive size have led many people to fear or 
even hate them. This problem is only compounded upon by the fact that 
large populations of elves shy away from human civilization, opting 
instead to live as traditional hunters and gatherers in the High 
Rilausian Forest in Dalvozzea or among the Izedan caravans of the Quist.
 This causes many young Tephrans to see elves as a kind of boogeymen, 
existing just beyond their horizon but still out of sight. Elves who do 
choose to spend their days in the countries of younger races are treated
 as second-class citizens, not enjoying many of the same civil rights as
 the other races. Elves often must use worse facilities and are 
sometimes banned from certain events, high-class neighborhoods, and 
restaurants.
     



      The
 exception to this is the Highborne Elf, the remaining elven nobility 
whose royal blood heralds back to the times of angelic elves. While far 
from being respected as equals to their non-elven counterparts, they are
 held in higher regard than the average person. Few dare disrespect an 
elf who can prove their Highborne lineage, most often through a signet 
ring or brooch the elf refuses to remove.
     



      Many
 elves have begun to migrate to Evangless, the nation most known for its
 open-mindedness and accepting culture. At least there they can bond 
with ayodin, a race discriminated against because of their involvement 
with the Hurricane Wars.
     







      Why Elves stay Elves
     



      In
 the last hundred years, wealthy elves have gone in droves to be 
converted into farishtaas. The core city of the conversion process, 
Cyronia in Dalvozzea, on any given day will have hundreds of newly 
converted farishtaas, and thousands of elves struggling to get by as 
they wait their turn. Yet not all elves want to become farishtaas. Why?
     







      Lack of Resources
     



      Of
 course, the number one reason elves stay elves is because they can’t 
afford it. The farishtaa conversion process is becoming more and more 
costly, and the wealth is being eaten up across Dalvozzea, the elven 
homeland. Most elves simply cannot afford the process, since the 
majority of elves live off sustenance farming or hunting and gathering.
     







      True to Themselves
     



      It
 didn’t take long for elves to make the realization that the farishtaa 
conversion process does not leave the original personality intact. Sure,
 fragments of the original personality remain, but the original elf is 
difficult to find under the new farishtaa personality that emerges.
     



      Some
 elves consider this to be akin to death and refuse to go through the 
conversion process. Those who believe that the conversion leads to death
 are sometimes chided as being stubborn or hard-headed. That doesn’t 
change the truth, however. None can deny that when an elf becomes a 
farishtaa, the change is more than cosmetic - the entire person becomes 
something different.
     







      Rebellious
     



      Many
 elves will choose not to become a farishtaa because they don’t support 
the hierarchy that has arisen around it. Following the recent Night of 
Feathers rebellion and the return of the original Girazza, many elves 
left the capital and surrounding towns and came to Adoipa, where they 
could live without farishtaas ruling over them.
     



      These
 elves have partially returned to their tribal roots, but they’ve also 
embraced technology and many of the new advances found throughout 
Dalvozzea. They are opposed to the farishtaas, believing them to be an 
abomination of the angels they were supposed to be.
     







      Traits of an Elf
     



      Big Boned: You gain a +2 on all Brute rolls.
     



      Speed:
 You have an improved speed of 30 feet. You have a swim speed of 20 
feet, and an amazing climbing speed of 30 feet.
     



      Tough: You gain an additional 4 hit points.
     



      Tree-Ripping
 Strength: Unarmed attacks and melee weapons you wield are 1 damage 
class higher than normal.
     



      Weak
 Souls: You suffer a -3 on all rolls with the Spirit attribute (this 
does not apply to skills under Spirit).
     



      Depleted Essence: Elves have one less slot for essence manipulations.
     











      Random Racial Traits
     



      1        Gears
 of the World: You see how even the most insignificant life fits into 
the larger ecosystem. You gain a +6 to Cunning when trying to discern if
 an area has recently been disturbed by nonorganic forces.
     



      2        Danger Sense: You can sense incoming danger. You gain a +3 on your priority.
     



      3        Ears
 to the Heavens: Whenever attempting to hear something, you 
automatically score one tier higher than you roll.
     



      4        Flight
 without Wings: You move at an amazing sprint, increasing your base land
 speed by 10 feet (to 40 feet).
     



      5        Fruit
 of the Fallen: As a descendant of the angels of yore, you have an 
indomitable spirit. You negate your Weak Soul trait and gain a +3 on 
your Spirit roll when using Heroics.
     



      6        Improperly
 Typecast: You prove that the stereotype of the dumb elf couldn’t be 
further from the truth. You gain a +2 on Cunning rolls when attempting 
to gather information.
     



      7        Like
 the Grave: Elves are skilled and patient hunters who are accustomed to 
remaining hidden in the same spot for long periods of time. After being 
hidden for a full turn, you gain a +5 to remaining unseen.
     



      8        Noble
 Creature: The blood of the predator courses through your veins, feeding
 you sweet adrenaline. For an extra action point when attacking, you can
 gain a bonus to Strike equal to your experience level.
     



      9        Raging
 Loyalty: Whenever an adjacent ally is struck in combat, you can make a 
melee attack against the assailant as a reflexive attack if the 
assailant is within reach.
     



      10        Tenacious
 Grip: If you get your hands onto something, nothing can pry it away 
from you. Whenever you attempt to remain holding onto something, you 
gain a +6 on the roll.
     



      11        Unstoppable:
 Despite whatever anyone throws at you, your elven legs keep running. 
When you would normally suffer a speed penalty for movement caused from a
 wound or status effect, that penalty is reduced by 10 feet.
     



      12        Vaulting
 Predator: Ancestors who leapt from tree to tree while stalking prey 
have infused your elven physiology with powerful legs capable of 
reaching incredible heights. You gain 10 feet of movement when leaping 
forward and 2 feet of height when jumping vertically.
     







      Farishtaas
     



      Physiology
     



      Farishtaas
 retain some of their elven host’s characteristics, but not many. During
 the days following the synthetic essence insertion, farishtaas’ spines 
straighten out, their blemishes disappear, and their skin and hair 
change tones. The entire spectrum of human tones of hair and skin appear
 within the farishtaa race, as well as many other softer or metallic 
tones. Their ears thicken and extend to straight points. Most farishtaas
 are taller than six feet, and many will tower over normal humans.
     



      Although
 a newborn farishtaa’s personality is a mangled amalgamation of the 
former elf, appearance and age don’t always correlate with farishtaa. 
Sometimes a highly mature personality forms inside a young elf, or a 
childish being is created through an older elf. While most farishtaas 
seem to match the maturity of the elf used, this formula is not always 
an accurate predictor. A newborn farishtaa knows everything their elf 
knew without having any of their memories.
     



      Lifespan:
 As the farishtaa race is still young, it is difficult to ascertain 
their normal lifespans. Many of the original farishtaas are still alive,
 though looking quite weathered. Scientists are claiming that a 
farishtaa will have an average lifespan of around 150 years (especially 
if the elf is young when he undergoes the conversion procedure). The 
winged farishtaas have shown virtually no signs of aging, however, and 
many believe that they are almost immortal.
     



      It
 has only been in the recent years that second generation farishtaas 
have begun to occur. For the farishtaas’ first century, it was believed 
that farishtaas were infertile. Recently farishtaa parents have begun 
having children. Some of these children are born elves, but most are 
born as farishtaas. (The elven children will often go through the 
synthetic essence insertion soon after birth.) Their growth rates vary 
extraordinarily - some will mature within ten years, while others, 
especially among the first second-generation farishtaas, have taken up 
to thirty years to reach maturity.
     



      Psychology
     



      Farishtaas
 are unique among the other Tephran races, as their culture developed in
 roundabout ways. They desire companionship, though their friendships 
tend to be less based on loyalty than friendships among other races. 
They form large rings of friends, and sometimes even marry if they find 
another farishtaa they have an immense connection with.
     



      Farishtaas
 value life and freedom. They keep immaculate care of their bodies, as 
farishtaas truly see their bodies as their temples. When a farishtaa 
comes into being, except in very rare circumstances, they feel an 
intense connection with the sky. They love open-air architecture and 
hate to be constantly cramped into one small area. They are considered 
to be the best pilots in the world; their natural love of the air allows
 them to understand the way the wind flows. Most farishtaa dress 
themselves in all black and white and maybe one splash of color in order
 to distance themselves from the elves’ colorful and gaudy wardrobes.
     



      Most
 farishtaas look down upon the elves, seeing them either as vessels for 
future farishtaas or as expendable creatures  that deserve a 
lowlier existence. Farishtaas have taken control over the upper strata 
of elven society, and even the lowliest of farishtaas are often given 
preferential treatment over the most respected of elves.
     



      Things
 are changing, however, as not all elves are taking this treatment 
laying down anymore. Many fight the farishtaa regime through peaceful 
protest, violent riots, and everything in between. A growing number of 
younger farishtaas have begun to join the elven cry for freedom, and 
these farishtaas are showing elves more and more respect. Still most 
elves see the farishtaas as being worthy of praise bordering on worship.
 These social shackles have kept the elves from enjoying the same 
privileges as other races for many years.
     



      A
 very rare elf will undergo the synthetic essence insertion and become a
 winged farishtaa. These winged farishtaas are known as the Day Society,
 and they guide the other farishtaas as though they are the sun. When a 
winged farishtaa is born, it is a day of celebration across Dalvozzea, 
and the winged farishtaas rule over farishtaas and elves with almost no 
question.
     



      Farishtaa
 tend to mix well with the other races. They are sometimes viewed as 
evil by gnomes, who have always been close to the elves. Yet even this 
does not strain relations between them (especially since gnomes are 
known for their forgiveness). Farishtaas are also known to marry humans 
on occasion, though this is often less well-received in their respective
 societies.
     



      Roleplaying Tips
     



      While
 farishtaas do have similar traits, each farishtaa will have a 
different, almost defining trait to their personality. The dominant 
personality that surfaces with the creation of the farishtaa can be just
 about anything. Some farishtaas are so warped in the process that they 
become slightly insane, or their personality becomes highly obsessed 
with certain values and ideologies. In any case, as a farishtaa you have
 plenty of leeway to keep people guessing what you’re going to do next.
     



      Farishtaas
 are often proud and a bit lofty. You’ll likely appreciate beauty and 
life more than anyone else and have no shame in showing it. Farishtaas 
hold their bodies to be their temples, valuing their own beauty, grace, 
and poise. Farishtaas will fit in well among nobility and take well to 
grazing about, lounging, and enjoying the fruits of the world. However, 
their obsessions can keep them motivated and working far longer than any
 other race.
     







      Sample Adventurers
     



      Below are three farishtaa adventurers that you can use as inspiration when creating your own.
     



      Dio
     



      When
 Dio emerged from the farishtaa conversion procedure, his doctors said 
that he was one of their easiest procedures to date. Dio was quiet, 
didn’t struggle, and remained in complete control throughout the 
normally excruciating conversion. When he left the laboratory, he even 
recognized and greeted, by name, his old elven friends - an action 
almost unheard of among new farishtaas. Yet he did not linger for long. 
The conversion had given him a new insight into his own soul, a soul 
that was broken, undisciplined, and in need of training.
     



      Dio
 refused to settle down. He moved from city to city, seeking knowledge 
and training. He’s well known for his silence and focus. His drive to 
master himself is an obsession that makes other people’s life goals look
 like passing hobbies.
     



      Dio
 would probably have the following specialties: Inner calm (under 
Grace), Iron Palm (under Grace), and Thick Skin (under Resilience).
     



      Hephaeron
     



      One
 of the rare and prized second generation farishtaas, Hephaeron was born
 a prince among the farishtaas. His father is the head of the Erathos 
Legacy, making Hephaeron heir to a vast fortune and much respect.
     



      Hephaeron
 took to the Hunt like most young farishtaas. The Hunt, as they call it,
 is the farishtaa sport of mounting zephyrs (their personal-sized 
flyers, much like the Evanglessian ironbirds) and searching the skies 
for pirates and trespassing ships to shoot down or claim. Hephaeron was 
immediately talented aboard his zephyr but was shot down after trying to
 show off among his friends. They thought he was lost, but Hephaeron’s 
crash left him barely alive. He pulled himself out of the wreckage and 
made his way to a nearby elven village, where they aided him. Feeling 
abandoned by his farishtaa friends, Hephaeron became close with the 
elves, learning that these elves were disgusted by their treatment from 
most farishtaas. His heart going out to them, Hephaeron vowed to ensure 
that elves would be treated better in the future and took to the world 
to make true on his vow.
     



      Hephaeron
 would probably have the following specialties: Driving with Knees 
(under Ace), Knock-Off (under Marksmanship), and Level Flying (under 
Ace).
     



      Lysandros
     



      When
 Lysandros was reborn a farishtaa, he immediately fixated on the room he
 was in. All of the unique bio-flux equipment, the unusual serums and 
devices - it all just enamored him. He spent hours undergoing the 
usually painful physical transformation without noticing the pain, as he
 was enthralled by the technologies in the procedure room. He had to be 
physically escorted out of the laboratory in order for them to work with
 the next patient.
     



      Lysandros’s
 obsession with bio-flux continued. He quickly read (and grew bored 
with) everything he could find on the subject. He then began traveling 
around, talking with any scientists he could find. He worked for a time,
 helping administer the synthetic essence insertion. Yet even that could
 not keep him fully distracted.
     



      So
 Lysandros left Dalvozzea, hoping he could learn more from the humans 
who scorned bio-flux as an evil science, or the gnomes who were 
basically born knowing bio-flux, or the satyrs who were genetically 
built using the same principles as bio-flux. He left home so he could 
study bio-flux, and he plans on doing so no matter what gets in his way.
     



      Lysandros
 would probably have the following specialties: Bio-Invigoration, 
Bio-Zapper Developer, and Manipulate Essence (all of which are under 
Bio-Flux).
     







      Sample NPCs
     



      Below are three farishtaa non-player characters (NPCs) that a group of adventurers might run into on their travels.
     



      Jesha
     



      Jesha
 was a poor elf when she became a farishtaa, and she has since had to 
work hard to pay off her debts. She works helping farishtaas have a 
smooth transition from elf to farishtaa, working with patients after 
they’ve undergone the synthetic essence insertion procedure. Most 
notably, she helps farishtaas choose their new name. Many years ago, the
 newborn farishtaa Raviziel created the custom of choosing a new name to
 signify a farishtaa’s rebirth. Jesha takes notes of those new names and
 helps farishtaas choose their new one (though ultimately her opinion is
 rarely used).
     



      Osyra
     



      Osyra
 is one of the most frightening farishtaas in Dalvozzea. When she walks 
the streets, her two enormous flails are always drawn and dragging the 
ground behind her. Osyra has an immensely important job: she is one of 
the top guards for the Nine Wings of Divinity, the ruling council in 
Dalvozzea. She is both talented and frightening. She has decried most of
 the sinful lifestyles that farishtaas partake in, instead devoting 
herself to ensuring that the revolution known as the Night of Feathers 
never occurs again and that no elf ever again thinks that it can rise 
above its farishtaa masters.
     



      Pious the Knowledgeable
     



      Pious
 is an ancient farishtaa; many believe he was among the first hundred 
elves to make the conversion. He spent years as a professor among the 
white tower universities in Daion, teaching students from all across the
 continent. Pious has long since retired and is now an information 
broker of sorts. He’s constantly entertaining, having all sorts of 
people enjoying coffees and teas with him in his open-air abode. He 
sells off his knowledge and theories; many people value him for his 
opinions almost more so than they value his knowledge. Pious’s thoughts 
can be bought off him, though he also appreciates a good trade. He has a
 special fancy for foreign newspapers, which he collects.
     







      Personality Blender
     



      While
 the physical changes an elf goes through when becoming a farishtaa are 
obvious, the mental changes are often more subtle. The conversion 
process scrambles the personality traits of the elf, some minor traits 
becoming prominent ones and vice versa, while eliminating nearly all the
 farishtaa’s memories of their life in their previous body. While most 
farishtaas can pass off as a reimagined version of their elf, many are 
so different that their elven family members find themselves unable to 
recognize anything about their former loved one. This is by far the most
 dangerous aspect of creating a farishtaa, as once latent violent 
tendencies can surface, unleashing a brutal force onto the streets that 
no scientist could have predicted.
     



      The
 most common unexpected trait farishtaas exhibit is a personality tic: 
hardly noticeable unconscious actions a farishtaa will only act out on 
occasion. Below are some of the most populous personality tics, in no 
particular order.
     



      Confusing the names of close associates with those of complete strangers
     



      Nonviolent mood swings lasting just a few seconds
     



      Looking at a non-elf and seeing an elf instead
     



      Random bursts of laughter
     



      Delusions of hearing the voice of their old self
     



      Viciously scratching at their own skin
     



      Entering a trance-state after glancing at the sky
     



      Fixation on attaining something they cannot have
     







      Become a Farishtaa Today!
     



      Brought to you by: the Farishtaas-for-Farishtaas Foundation
     



      Good
 day, elves! Once you’re ready to leave your incomplete body behind to 
become the angel you were born to be, run, don’t walk, to your nearest 
farishtaa-conversion facility! A simple process, really. All we use is a
 table to strap you to, a vat of synthetic essence, a set of injection 
rods to ensure proper dispersal of solution, and a board-certified 
farishtaa technician.
     



      After
 signing in and paying off any fines, you will be brought into the 
conversion room where you will be invited to lay on our state-of-the-art
 conversion table. Sensors will be attached to your body so your vital 
signs can be monitored, although we assure you this is simply a 
formality set forth by our insurance provider.* You’ll be tightly 
fastened down by your arms and legs for your own safety. The technician 
then painlessly* inserts the foot-long injection rods into your body at 
various key points and attaches the hoses at the ends of the rods into 
the tank of synthetic essence.
     



      After
 several hours of forced infusion that you’ll hardly notice,* your body 
will go limp from the mental strain of your personality becoming 
shuffled. During this time your body will begin to shift and slim, your 
skin clearing up, with most of your body hair falling out. A 10,000 watt
 bolt of electricity is administered over time to your now-farishtaa 
body to complete the process and to jump-start your unconscious mind. A 
welcome guide meets your new persona at the door to help them through 
the paperwork accompanying birth, including the important steps of 
selecting a name and being reintegrated into society.
     



      *Our
 insurance provider forces us to inform you the farishtaa-conversion 
process is believed to be incredibly painful, but honestly, your new 
farishtaa mind won’t even remember it! Yes, on occasion an elf has died 
before the process was complete, but that’s a better end than continuing
 to live as an elf, right?
     











      Traits of a Farishtaa
     



      Born
 to be Airborne: Farishtaas begin with 2 skill points in Ace (they may 
add their starting points there as per normal).
     



      Speed:
 You have the average 25 foot movement speed. You have a swim speed of 
15 feet and a climbing speed of 15 feet.
     



      Piercing
 Scrutiny: Even in the heat of battle, farishtaas keep their calm and 
fixate on their target. This grants them a +1 on their accuracy rolls.
     



      Unpredictable:
 Farishtaas can be difficult to anticipate and manipulate. Whenever 
interacting with people, farishtaas gain a +2 on their Cunning roll.
     











      Random Racial Traits
     



      1        Botched
 Surgery: Though most people might not pick up on it, your features are a
 bit more feral, a bit more elven, than most farishtaas. You gain the 
Tree-Ripping Strength and Weak Soul traits of an elf.
     



      2        Dancer’s
 Body: Your sleek farishtaa body is far more flexible than any of the 
other races could ever hope for. You gain a +2 on your dexterity rolls.
     



      3        Emotional
 Unavailability: It’s not that you are courageous or fearless - you 
simply don’t notice fear most of the time. When you would be affected by
 fear, lower the fear effect by 1 tier. (As such, you are immune to tier
 1 fear effects.)
     



      4        Instant
 Motion: You’re always moving, always in motion, and nothing catches you
 off-guard. You may spend 1 action point reflexively in order to gain a 
+8 on your priority roll when combat begins.
     



      5        Halo:
 You have an aura of light that slightly illuminates 10 feet around you 
and also creates a small amount of heat. This effect is repressible at 
will and cannot overcome artificially created darkness (like that 
created by an item).
     



      6        Prominent
 Host: Your body exhibits some subtle characteristics of the elf it once
 was. Roll on the elven random racial traits to determine your trait.
     



      7        Skin-Deep
 Values: Farishtaa culture values beauty, so you’ve learned how to 
protect your appearance. You gain a +2 to evade and resist called shots 
to your head, eyes, and ears.
     



      8        Spirit
 of the Angels: Your will is strong. If you roll a 1 with the Spirit 
attribute, you may still add any bonuses to it as if it were a normal 
roll. (This does not apply to skills under the Spirit attribute.)
     



      9        Superiority
 Complex: You exude an aura of pure, unstoppable confidence regardless 
of how hesitant you really are. You cause foes adjacent to you to doubt 
themselves. Foes adjacent to you suffer a -2 on their defense rolls.
     



      10        Tinge
 Of Insanity: Every so often a farishtaa surgery has a few unexpected 
psychological side effects. While it most likely doesn’t affect you at 
all in your daily life, your mental quirks begin to come out after a 
harsh beating. Whenever you have lost all your hit points, you receive a
 +4 to both accuracy and strike.
     



      11        Unexplainable
 Memories: Your mind knows things that you (in this life or your 
previous) could never possibly have learned. You gain a +2 on all 
Cunning rolls.
     



      12        Undeveloped
 Wings: Though you’re no member of the winged Day Society, your 
synthetic essence had a little more punch than the normal batch. You 
have small wings that make you lighter than air. Unless bound, 
unconscious, or in inclement weather, you take no falling damage as your
 wings will gently guide you to the ground.
     







      Gnomes
     



      The
 sly gnomes are, by far, the shortest people in the world, rarely 
standing much over two feet tall. As some would say, their small stature
 keeps them closer to nature than the taller, loftier races. They have a
 knack for all things natural, a quickness to their wit, and, though 
their physical prowess doesn’t touch that of the other races, gnomes 
make up for it with their mental faculties.
     



      For
 as long as any can remember, the gnomes have flourished as a hidden 
race. Keeping to themselves and rarely wishing to interact with 
strangers, the gnomes built underground towns, nestled their homes 
within hills in the forests, and chose locations that few would find 
reason to venture to. Yet times changed, and the rise of the Haudi 
Empire saw the downfall of the gnomes’ quiet lifestyles. The gnomes were
 enslaved, and their keen minds and understanding with nature was put to
 quick work for the Hauds. With the gnomish scientists serving them, the
 Hauds were able to develop numerous creatures and begin bio-engineering
 new races, the most successful of which being the satyrs.
     



      Today,
 centuries after gnomes have gained their freedom from the falling Haudi
 Empire, gnomes have been unable to recapture their old, solitary lives.
 Though gnomes do, perhaps out of habit or old traditions, take many 
steps to disguise their cities, many gnomes are outright and open about 
themselves nowadays. Numerous gnomish communities thrive on the 
outskirts of other cities, and these communities can often be hubs for 
unusual pieces of technology and wonders not found in any other race’s 
homes.
     







      Physiology
     



      Gnomes
 are exceptionally short, but their small stature is made up for with a 
large presence. The proportions on gnomes are often very similar to that
 of a human - they are small, but not stubby. Their hair and skin color 
is the same pigment range as humans, though red hair is much more 
common. Their eyes come in many hues, but always have a glassy or 
crystalline look to them. Some gnome’s eyes flash brightly in the 
sunlight, looking like blinking, red lights from a distance.
     



      Their
 eyes are their strongest features, as gnomish eyes are the best eyes in
 the world. They have the ability to pick out details at a far distance,
 and some gnomes can even “bend” their sight around angles, a skill they
 find easy. However, this often stretches out their sight, and many 
gnomes are intensely far-sighted. For centuries gnomes have perfected 
spectacles, goggles, and monocles for reading up close, one of their 
greatest weaknesses.
     



      Lifespans:
 Gnomes have the longest lifespans of any race, living to be almost 200 
years old. Gnomes reach adulthood at around 30 years, as it takes a 
while for their bodies to mature. Surprisingly, however, it only takes a
 year or so from birth for gnomes to mentally mature to the point where 
they can talk, read, and interact with people at the same level as human
 teenagers.
     







      Psychology
     



      Gnomes
 are often kind, big-hearted people. They’ll go out of their way for 
their neighbors and are always willing to treat their guests well. 
However, an angry gnome is one out for vengeance, and vengeance can be 
ugly. Gnomes are deceptive and fond of tricks, only letting people know 
what they need to know. Some gnomes are pathological liars and thieves 
yet seem entirely polite until caught.
     



      Younger
 gnomes are more likely to be hot-headed, but the elders become very 
close with nature. Gnomes in their twilight years can spend weeks in a 
forest, just communing with nature. All gnomes are close with nature, 
understanding it better than any other race. This understanding can 
sometimes build resentment toward other races, as the gnomes refuse to 
allow for the destructive industrialization that other races push for. 
Gnomes deeply believe that industrialization can come with nature’s good
 graces, and they push for their technology to prove it.
     



      Rolling
 hills and sparse forests are gnomes’ favorite places to live, though 
many also favor mountains and denser forests. When gnomes aren’t living 
in pocket communities outside larger cities, gnomes will often choose 
villages that are easily secluded and difficult to find.
     



      Gnomish
 communities are often very close. They will share farmland, dispense 
with currencies, and almost entirely ignore each other’s privacy. 
Strangers to these small communities, however, are entirely unwelcome 
and ousted quickly. The occasional gnomish city, often created out of 
necessity more-so than want, will look nothing like a gnomish community.
 Gnomish cities are larger affairs (though small by nature), with 
intricate building complexes and roads that are terribly difficult to 
navigate. Gnomish cities will often look grown, with houses made out of 
woven wood trees everywhere.
     



      Gnomes
 are a loving, carefree race of people that often want almost nothing to
 do with any other race. Gnomes that live in non-gnome nations, however,
 will treat most races equally. Gnomes will even treat the Hauds, who 
gnomes have had a long and violent relationship with, with respect until
 the Haud proves otherwise. Gnomes are especially close with satyrs and 
elves, who gnomes see as the most earthly and wise of the races. While 
most gnomes won’t say anything, they are often at least slightly 
disgusted by farishtaas, as they fear the methods behind their creation.
     







      Roleplaying Tips
     



      Gnomes
 come in two varieties - those gnomes who have grown up in hidden pocket
 communities, and gnomes who have lived on the fringe of larger, more 
diverse societies. The reclusive gnomes will be more shy, less willing 
to deal with strangers, but also more likely to be nice and aim for 
non-violent means of solving disputes.
     



      The
 most outward gnomes, on the other hand, are likely to be more 
hot-headed, more rambunctious, and more willing to say whatever is 
necessary to get what he wants. Gnomes can be magnificent liars, and 
these gnomes won’t hide that fact.
     



      Either
 way, your gnome is going to be very close with nature. The gnomish 
“methods,” or the ways the gnomes communicate with the earth, are very 
close to the gnomes. Gnomes will build things differently, and they 
won’t be a fan of fire- and steel-driven industry. If you’re playing a 
gnome, don’t be afraid to get into a fight, but do understand that there
 are consequences to that fight.
     







      Sample Adventurers
     



      Below are three gnomish adventurers that you can use as inspiration when creating your own.
     







      Jari Hungoo
     



      Jari
 might have been born in a home that many would describe as nothing more
 than a cave, but Jari’s always been on the lookout for ways to go up, 
up, up! He habitually hangs out with ruffians, true, but Jari Hungoo 
likes good people, tasty and sweet liquors, and making an honest prince.
 Jari’s a bit of a fighter, scanty and quick, who makes good use of 
pushing his enemies’ weight against them.
     



      Jari
 will be quick to admit that he’s a recovering gambler (but a good 
one!). He uses the phrase, “two sides of the same coin,” with great 
frequency and little discretion. Jari is dedicated to improving his life
 and that of his future family, whenever he’s lucky enough to meet that 
right gal. He’s got a big personality, and he’s not afraid to show it.
     



      Jari
 Hungoo would probably have the following specialties: Bone-Breaker 
(under Brawl), Dirty Fighting (under Brawl), and Hex (under Luck).
     







      Wegdo the Sufficient
     



      From
 an early age, everybody knew that Wegdo was going to be metal-deranged.
 His family of traveling merchants went from town to town, selling their
 wares, and all Wegdo would ever do is look for the newest contraption 
or greatest doodad. Wegdo was so hyper-active that his family barely 
knew what to do with him, up until they came to a town where a local 
automaton forger was looking for an apprentice. Wegdo was quick to apply
 (and his family vibrantly consented).
     



      Though
 many wanted to be the old automaton forger’s apprentice, the man 
eventually made his decision, having sighed and looked at the gnome, 
“Fine, you’ll be sufficient.” Ever since then, Wegdo has gleefully 
(sometimes bitterly, depending on his mood) called himself Wegdo the 
Sufficient.
     



      But
 two wars and several decades later, Wegdo’s automatons are no longer 
merely sufficient. Wegdo loves to make the biggest, craziest, most 
maniacal automatons possible. He specializes in steamers, making 
enormous steam-powered automatons that he walks around in. Wegdo has 
long since surpassed his master, and is now going about, looking for his
 betters, hoping to find the newest whatchamacallit or gizmo, and always
 tinkering with his automatons.
     



      Wegdo
 the Sufficient would probably have the following specialties: Learn 
Augments (under Sciences), Steam-Powered Crafter (under Automata), and 
Trinket Crafter (under Gadgetry).
     







      Sandra N. Griffiths III
     



      Sandra
 comes from a long line of gnomish rangers who served as the Siddeodru 
border guard. She was born after Siddeodru fell to Evangless, but she 
valued her family’s lineage and her birthright. She grew up with an 
artificially overgrown wolfhound by her side named Whitethorn. 
Whitethorn grew large and became her mount while Sandra learned the old 
gnomish ways of the bow and the hunt.
     



      Sandra
 joined the Evanglessian army as a ranger and scout during the civil 
war, siding with the militarists. She spent much of her time alone 
looking for enemy automaton movements. After the war, and with the 
militarist loss, she tried to leave her reclusive ways. Sandra spent 
some time as mercenary, though it was an uphill battle having to prove 
that she could be just as efficient with her bow and wolfhound mount as 
others could be with their firearms.
     



      Sandra
 N. Griffith III would probably have the following specialties: 
Efficient Ranger (under Marksmanship), Flesh Biter (under Marksmanship),
 and Quick Mount (under Ace).
     











      Sample NPCs
     



      Below are three gnomish non-player characters (NPCs) that a group of adventurers might run into on their travels.
     



      Bildra Hogglezards
     



      Professor
 Hogglezards is an old, paranoid woman who has a habit of running to her
 wooden cottage (desperately far from civilization) and hiding. She’s an
 old Siddeodruid who was young during the razing of her town. The shock 
left her jittery.
     



      Regardless
 of her setbacks, Bildra Hogglezards is a well respected lecturer and 
one of the foremost craftswomen in wooden rifles and stocks. She knows 
quite a bit about the different ways to grow wood and carving it for 
firearms. In fact, she has quite a few examples stored in her 
hard-to-find cottage, just in case anybody spooks her.
     



      Maddock
     



      With
 a temper as short as he is, Maddock is a rambunctious gnome who has 
learned to surround himself with larger friends who will back him up 
when he inevitably ends up in a brawl. His elderly uncle berates him to 
learn to control his anger, trying to get the quarrelsome scamp to relax
 himself in nature’s embrace. Far too impatient for sitting calmly in 
the middle of the woods, Maddock shows no intention of changing his 
ways.
     



      Reiner
     



      Reiner
 made his fortune mass-producing prosthetic limbs for soldiers on both 
sides of Evangless’ recent civil war. Rich beyond his wildest dreams, 
the stout gnome built an impressive estate just outside Evangless’ 
capital, Razule. Set on enjoying his newfound retirement, he spends his 
time hosting week-long banquets for friends and nobles alike. Always the
 life of the party, Reiner proves the size of your heart outweighs the 
size of your body.
     







      Metal-Deranged
     



      Gnomes
 love nature, the woods, and everything the world provides to them. The 
naturally occurring ores and metals help the gnomes construct greater 
machines and tools, but gnomes rarely use excessive amounts of worked 
metals in their creations. Many gnomes who have been embraced by human 
society, however, switch their allegiances away from the organic woods 
and vegetation and instead bond with metals. These gnomes are called 
metal-deranged.
     



      Metal-deranged
 gnomes often speak with their metal creation, softly warping the metal 
with their brushing hands, and use almost exclusively large, metal 
tools. The most common metal-deranged gnomes will be machinists, working
 on oversized metal automatons or enormous metal artillery or monstrous 
metal-armored vehicles.
     



      Metal-deranged
 gnomes forsake many of their gnomish traits, becoming loud, excessive, 
and often-times obsessed with material values, trinkets, and taking 
things apart. They rarely value staying hidden, as many gnomes do, and 
many metal-deranged gnomes can be rude, self-centered, and pay little 
mind to others. Whereas most gnomes are known for their hospitality and 
their inability to keep grudges, metal-deranged gnomes are the exact 
opposite.
     



      Until
 recently, metal-deranged gnomes have been rare. A few were written 
about during the reign of the Haudi Empire when gnomes served under the 
Hauds. Today however, metal-deranged gnomes are everywhere. The mental 
disorder (as normal gnomes are prone to think of it as) has become 
widespread, and many humans, especially Evanglessians, have come to 
think that metal-deranged gnomes are the norm, not the exception.
     







      Traits of a Gnome
     



      Small Stature: Gnomes gain a +1 on evade rolls.
     



      Greater Spirit: Gnomes gain a +3 on Spirit rolls.
     



      Light Build: Gnomes suffer a -2 on Brute rolls.
     



      Speed:
 You have the lower 15 foot movement speed. You have a swim speed of 10 
feet and a climbing speed of 10 feet.
     



      Smaller
 Weapons: Because of their comparable size, gnomes are too small to 
conceal light weapons on their person. In addition, their smaller fists 
make their unarmed attacks deal a damage class of 1.
     



      Random
 Racial Traits: In addition to rolling for their random racial trait, 
gnomes may select one random racial trait without rolling. If they roll 
the same story that they chose, re-roll.
     







      Random Racial Traits
     



      1        Bend
 Sight: You can bend your sight - literally allowing you to see around a
 wall, or over a building. You can bend your sight up to 90 degrees.
     



      2        Deep
 Pockets: No one knows quite how you do it, but you can make items 
significantly larger than yourself vanish into thin air. You can conceal
 both light and medium items.
     



      3        Earthshape:
 You can speak with the earth and ask it to move for you. For 2 action 
points, you can cause the earth to either raise or lower by 5 feet in a 5
 foot area. Once raised or lowered in such a way, it cannot be shaped by
 a gnome again until it naturally levels out (which will occur within a 
couple days).
     



      4        Feel
 the Earth: You can feel the earth through your skin, knowing what it 
feels. While barefoot or in some way touching solid ground, you can feel
 footsteps and other things that cause the ground to vibrate within 15 
feet. If somebody is attempting to keep their footsteps hidden, you and 
that person may attempt opposed Cunning rolls. If you win, you sense 
their location. This ability does not negate any penalties you would 
take for being blind, but it does tell you where enemies could be 
standing.
     



      5        Growth
 Intensity: You have learned one of the gnome’s most complicated arts - 
that of natural growth. This growth allows you to, in almost an instant,
 grow to the size of an elf. You must be standing on solid ground to do 
this, and it requires one action point to switch between your two sizes.
 While large, you use the racial traits of elves and lose those of 
gnomes.
     



      6        Noiseless:
 You walk as though you are on a pad of air, completely unheard. When 
you are sneaking, you are entirely silent and cannot be heard due to 
your footsteps alone. You still make noise from the equipment that you 
are carrying and wear. When you are trying to sneak, you automatically 
receive 1 tier higher.
     



      7        Parts
 of Nature: You may speak with nature, and nature will lend you its aid.
 You may, for 3 action points, request a tree or the earth to lend you a
 piece of itself. Your draw a simple tool out of a tree or a patch of 
dirt, coming in the shape of a light (or smaller) weapon, a tool such as
 a hammer or wrench, a torch, or any other light-sized basic equipment. 
This does not warp or deplete the wood or earth that the item was drawn 
from, and that area of nature cannot lend a piece of itself again for 
quite some time.
     



      8        Piercing
 Sight: You can see a fly 300 feet away simply by focusing in on it, and
 this ungodly sight has given you a great precision with ranged weapons.
 Whenever firing a ranged weapon, you can shoot it twice as far as 
normal, and you gain a +2 on accuracy rolls with that weapon.
     



      9        Ripcord
 Muscles: Your powerful spirit flows through your arms and into the 
items you carry. You negate your Light Build trait and gain a +2 to 
strike. In addition, your unarmed attacks have a damage class of 2.
     



      10        Waterwalk:
 You and water have reached a balance, allowing you to stand on calm 
waters. For 1 action point every turn, you may stand on top of a body of
 water. If you cease to spend that action point for even a turn, you 
fall into the water. You cannot waterwalk while underwater - you must 
first be above the water and then step onto it.
     



      11        Windwalk:
 The wind is yours to control, and you may borrow its power to glide 
across the ground. For 1 action point, you may windwalk in one direction
 40 feet. You cannot change direction during this windwalking. 
Windwalking does not allow you to fly - you are still walking on the 
ground, though the wind is carrying your strides
     



      12        Wry:
 Your size and your limberness make you terribly difficult to hit. You 
gain an additional +1 on evade rolls.
     







      Satyrs
     



      Satyrs
 are counted among the greatest successes from the long list of 
experiments that the Haudi Empire conducted. The Haudi Empire, long 
obsessed with combining their own knowledge of science and alchemy with 
the knowledge of nature’s inner workings that their gnomish slaves 
possessed, endeavored to create a race of slaves. Many of their 
experiments failed, leading to a number of warped and horrible 
creatures, creatures that the Haudi Empire - to this day - is still 
trying to entirely exterminate. Eventually the Haudi Empire would create
 the satyrs, a race of people that are known for their speed, their 
empathy, and their loyalties. This servant race has not stayed loyal to 
the Haudi Empire, though. Satyr rebellions added fuel to the fire, 
helped crack the unbreakable Haudi Empire, and today most satyrs are 
free to do as they will.
     



      The
 most common satyrs combine what, at first glance, look like the 
features of a goat with a human. Though they’re bipedal, their legs look
 like those of a goat. Many satyrs will also have horns, but the sizes 
and styles will vary from a small slight curve to large, spiraling 
horns.
     



      Satyrs
 are found all over the continent now, having fully integrated with 
humans. Though there are still a number of satyrs bound to slavery in 
the remnants of the Haudi Empire, most have escaped to free pastures. 
Satyrs are common in Evangless, where they are largely seen as equals. 
Free satyrs, especially freeborn satyrs, tend to be loud, 
rabble-rousing, and fun-loving. They drink all day and frequently share 
with their friends. Unfortunately for their friends, satyrs are almost 
completely immune to the negative effects of alcohol, so it’s only their
 friends of other races that are affected.
     



      Well-known
 for their fun spirit, their never-say-die attitudes, and their newfound
 love of freedom, satyrs who have broken free from slavery make the best
 of it. Unfortunately, individual experiences can quickly alter the 
satyr norm, as satyrs born into slavery can differ drastically from the 
easily excited freeborns.
     







      Physiology
     



      Satyrs
 are revised and altered humans, so many of their qualities are those of
 humans. From their hair to their eyes to their body types, they all run
 the gamut of human options. But satyrs are bio-engineered race, and 
their differences are pronounced. The two most common differences are in
 the satyrs’ legs and horns.
     



      Satyrs
 have the legs and hindquarters of a goat. They are typically covered in
 thin hair that matches that on the rest of their body. Like a human, 
their torso tends to be hairless or lightly haired.
     



      Satyr
 horns come in a great many styles, and many times satyrs will use the 
style of their horns to denote what region they were born in or what 
“strain” they were born from. Some will have tight spiraling horns, 
while others will stand straight up. Others will have slightly sloping 
horns. They typically come out near or behind the satyr’s temples. 
Female satyrs typically have smaller horns than the males, but this is 
certainly not always the case.
     



      Satyrs
 will dress in many of the same styles that their fellow nationals have.
 Satyr pants typically come taller and in baggier styles because of 
satyrs’ thicker thighs and hairier legs. Horn decorations and piercings 
are common, though satyrs can still feel through their horns and any 
significant alterations to their horns can be quite painful.
     



      Because
 satyrs were created and come from numerous strains, satyr physiology 
can differ greatly. Some scientists will drastically alter a satyr 
strain before creation, giving them unusual hair or eye colors, odd 
horns, or even slightly altered legs. Though they are rare, some satyrs 
have tails. These tails might be small, fluffy tails, long whipping 
tails, or haired horse tails. These unusual strains can come off as 
strange among the other races, but satyrs have a habit of accepting all 
satyr variations.
     



      Satyrs
 are renowned for their speed. No other race can match a satyr 
step-for-step. Unfortunately, climbing and swimming tend to be problems 
for satyrs - actions best left to other races. Satyrs get a wide variety
 of footwear and will often shave down or shape their hooves. Because 
satyrs tend to make a good deal of noise when they walk, many satyrs 
will wear padded or leather shoes over their hooves to make themselves a
 little quieter.
     



      Satyrs
 are almost entirely immune to the effects of alcohol and resist other 
chemicals more easily. When originally designed, the Haudi scientists 
added this function to make satyrs more dependable workers. Because of 
their immunity, satyrs have made a culture around alcohol, enjoying the 
beverages for their flavor rather than the mental effects.
     



      Lifespans:
 Satyr lifespans are almost identical to those of humans. Satyr children
 are commonly called satyrisci, and satyr children are typically much 
quieter than adults. Though it is less common, older satyrs are called 
sileni. Sileni is often used as a title of respect in satyr communities.
     



















      Psychology
     



      Satyrs
 have a reputation for being fun, easily excited, and hard-working. The 
reputation isn’t always fitting, but there’s a good deal of truth in it.
 They are naturally social, as they are perceptive and empathetic to 
others.
     



      Satyrs
 who are freeborn or have gained their freedom enjoy wide open spaces 
and a simple life. They are typically happy as daily factory workers, as
 they are likely to spend their evenings enjoying themselves thoroughly.
 They don’t often give way to depression.
     



      Yet
 satyrs are emotional beings. They switch emotions quickly, being both 
quick to anger and quick to forgiveness. Among satyrs, it is perfectly 
normal for one satyr to be badmouthing another, for them to have a 
heated argument, and to end the night drinking together. That’s not to 
say that satyrs don’t hold grudges, as many wonder if they’ll ever 
forgive the Haudi Empire for their enslavement. But when somebody has 
apologized or learned their lesson, satyrs easily move forward.
     



      Satyr
 children, the satyrisci, are a quiet lot. They are often overshadowed 
by the louder adults. It’s given rise to the saying, “The devil’s in the
 horns.” In their teenage years, when a satyrisci starts to grow its 
horns, is the time that the wild and rambunctious side of the satyr will
 manifest. Satyrs tend to have rough (but exciting) teenage years.
     



      Satyrs
 are exceptionally empathetic. Scientists debate whether satyrs are just
 very perceptive of others or if they share a mental connection with 
other creatures, but satyrs are always aware of people’s emotions. 
Because of this, people will often hire satyrs at jury hearings or to 
keep around when interrogating somebody. They can easily and accurately 
discern most lies.
     



      Satyrs
 are friends with humans and gnomes alike. They easily blend in with 
human culture, and, despite their height differences, gnomes and satyrs 
often see eye-to-eye. Satyrs have a great deal of difficulty relating to
 farishtaas. For some reason, farishtaas seem so alien to satyrs that 
satyrs can’t accurately read them.
     







      Roleplaying Tips
     



      A
 satyr will be excited and fast-talking. You might come from a slave 
background, where you either more appreciate your current freedom or you
 are stalwart and reserved from your tough days as a slave. If you were 
born free, you’re much more likely to be well adjusted, though perhaps a
 bit garrulous and rambunctious. Satyrs tend toward the braggart and the
 good-natured loud mouths and use a variety of skills and weapons. 
Satyrs are loving, but they’re equally quick to action.
     







      Sample Adventurers
     



      Below are three satyr adventurers that you can use as inspiration when creating your own.
     



      Cassair Douglas
     



      Cassair
 spent several years working as a courier in Aldamiir, delivering 
messages by hoof as fast as he could. He was well recognized for his 
speed and reliability. His messages were always delivered within a few 
hours and always to the hand of the recipient. Everything changed when, 
one day, he delivered a message right in the midst of a Brimstone 
assassination. In the heat of the moment, his client hired him to get 
him out of there, and Cassair escaped with the client out of the city.
     



      Cassair’s
 face, however, was well remembered by the assassin, and soon many 
Brimstones were after him. With no way to return home, he took to the 
road, outrunning his pursuers. And, when he ran out of funds, he began 
taking whatever work he could gather.
     



      Cassair
 Douglas would probably have the following specialties: Feeling Lucky 
(under Luck), Wall Runner (under Agility), and Walk Over (under 
Agility).
     



      Monica Moinnine
     



      People
 always used to joke that if you harmed one of Monica’s flock, she’d 
bring down the fury of the heavens. Monica, who worked at an orphanage 
in northern Evangless, was known both for the fervor of her faith in the
 Beloved Mother of Tailemy as well as the conviction with which she 
watched over the children in her care. And it wasn’t a few times that 
Monica would have to leave the orphanage to get one of the boys out of 
trouble.
     



      One
 day she heard a rumor about a satyr boy - a boy who had been adopted 
less than a year ago - who was being abused by his adopted human 
parents. Without a second thought, she made her way across the 
countryside, found the small family manor, and broke in. She found the 
boy, along with many others, tied up in cages in the barn. Her fury 
visited the adoptive parents, who were barely left alive.
     



      Equally
 ashamed of her act of violence as she was moved to ensure that there 
were no other children being treated in such a way, she left the 
orphanage and made her way into the world, fighting for the freedom of 
children everywhere.
     



      Monica
 Moinnine would probably have the following specialties: Grief & 
Hope (under Faith), Healing Halo (under Faith), and Heavy-Handed (under 
Brawl).
     



      Silas Caughey
     



      Silas
 is a well known entrepreneur, both a serious and seriously liked man. 
His grandfather was an escaped slave from Siyesh, inspiring Silas to 
make honest money and never be a servant to anybody. Silas has started a
 fair number of businesses, and, through some have been failures, he’s 
turned a good coin in his day.
     



      A
 few years ago, Silas gained an interest in finding ancient artifacts, 
especially elven and Izedan ones. He funded a number of expeditions, 
eventually putting a very significant amount of money behind a promising
 one. But the last expedition did not return, and Silas’s invested 
fortune was lost to him.
     



      When
 Silas heard of another expedition forming, he stepped in, both helping 
fund it but also requesting a place in it. He couldn’t stand the idea of
 waiting at home; he wanted to be involved. And that, he says, was just 
the start of a number of adventures Silas Caughey would find himself 
embroiled in.
     



      Silas
 Caughey would probably have the following specialties: Direct the 
Battle (under Tactical), Praise (under Showmanship), and Weapon 
Appropriations (under Expertise).
     







      Sample NPCs
     



      Below are a few satyr non-player characters (NPCs) that a group of adventurers might run into on their travels.
     



      Brian Brennus
     



      Sometimes
 people just need to talk to someone who can understand their feelings. 
For many people in Aldamiir, that someone is Brian Brennus: bartender of
 the Roaring Lion Pub. Brian’s natural empathy and reputation as a great
 listener have made him the favorite of regulars and newcomers alike. 
Bouncers know that when Brian is on the clock they have little to worry 
about, as the persuasive satyr knows quite a few tricks on how to calm 
an angry patron.
     



      Druston of the Industrial Strain
     



      The
 fear of every young cadet in Evangless’ army, Drustan is the fiercest 
drill sergeant the military dares remember. Never seen outside of his 
uniform, the grizzled veteran refuses to be found eating or sleeping in 
front of his men as it would make him appear mortal. Drustan’s superiors
 love and fear him as none of his peers can produce the same quality 
killing machines as the infantrymen who survive a week with the 
ever-furious satyr.
     



      Old Miss Macushla
     



      Macushla
 has spent her many years accomplishing many tasks. She’s worked as a 
waitress, a seamstress, and even put in a few years at the factory. She 
and her husband kept orphans for several years, but they’ve mostly moved
 on and her husband passed away several years ago. It’s been in these 
last few years that Macushla feels like she’s found her true calling, as
 her house sits on a road just a little ways north of Zelhost. In fact, 
it’s perfectly situated to taking in escaped satyr slaves and refugees 
and, if necessary, hiding them for a few days. She’s had a few close 
calls with bounty hunters who have dared cross into Evanglessian 
territory, but she’s not so attached to life that she’ll stop what she’s
 doing. And few satyr escapees pass by Old Miss Macushla’s cottage 
without forever owing her their gratitude.
     







      Culture of Alcohol
     



      The
 Haud planned ahead. When they created the satyrs, they specifically 
examined the effects of alcohol on their system. They didn’t want 
servants who would be impaired by drinking, so they altered the way 
alcohol affected the satyrs’ bloodstream. Alcohol does not impair 
satyrs; rather, it works like a mild stimulant. For a satyr, drinking a 
pint of ale is no different from a human drinking a cup of coffee.
     



      Due
 to water sanitation problems, drinking fermented beverages became a 
mainstay among Hauds and their servants. Satyrs almost exclusively drank
 ale and wine for hundreds of years, and, today, satyrs are known for 
carrying alcohol on them like other races carry canteens of water. 
Satyrs are known for creating the best beverages, and carrying 
satyr-made brews is a point of pride among taverns and pubs.
     



      In
 Evangless, the most popular alcoholic beverages sold in the public 
houses are all brewed by satyrs.
     



      Elympia
 Dark, a dark lager first brewed over two centuries ago by a satyr woman
 named Elympia in order to please her Haud master. He was so impressed 
that he had her brew more and more of it and started selling it. 
Eventually the family gained their freedom and started selling it under 
the name of the original brewer.
     



      MacClairies,
 a fruity, orange wine brewed from the rare orange grapes in Arudika. 
The MacClairies family owned the first vineyards in Arudika, and so all 
orange wines from Arudika are now known as MacClairies, regardless of 
which vineyard they come from.
     



      Empathy,
 a dark, red wine brewed in vineyards in southeastern Evangless near the
 Zelhost border, known as being the wine that people first use to 
celebrate marriages and the wine used to mourn deceased lovers.
     



      High
 Caliber, a cheap spiced rum from Siyesh known for having the most 
violent alcohol content of any liquor. High Caliber has a reputation for
 causing numerous riots, barfights, and wars. Regardless of its 
reputation, High Caliber is a favorite drink among sky pirates, thugs, 
and ruffians of all types.
     







      Original Creation
     



      Almost
 five hundred years ago the Haudi Empire was at its height. They covered
 much of Rilausia, and both gnomes and elves fell under the empire. The 
Haudi Empire had long been the innovative force in alchemy, and the 
gnomes, masters over nature and life, made a unique combination that the
 Haudi Empire planned on cashing in on.
     



      For
 years, the Haudi Empire worked alongside the gnomes to create new 
races. They went through numerous abominations before their first 
success: a warlike race called the manticores. Yet the manticores were 
impossible to control, their bloodlust exceeding their ability to 
reason. The Hauds recognized their failures and began working toward a 
new race.
     



      The
 experimentations that followed led to the creation of satyrs. The 
satyrs were a race bred by combining the essence of the Satarrans, a 
nationality that the Haudi Empire had almost wiped out during their 
subjugation, with other animals - the most prominent of which being 
goats and rams.
     



      Over
 the years, various satyr strains were born, each with slightly 
different combinations of animal essence and in-born personalities. Yet 
the basic satyr formula remained largely the same, and satyrs became the
 most popular form of servant throughout the Haudi Empire.
     







      Gaining Freedom
     



      About
 three hundred years ago, the satyrs in Siyesh began a rebellion, led by
 one of history’s most enigmatic and bloodthirsty tacticians, a satyr 
named Arakrith. By the end of the rebellion, a new free nation of satyrs
 had been carved out of northwest Rilausia, named after the rebellion’s 
leader.
     



      Over
 the years, even more satyrs have gained their freedom from the Hauds. 
Many satyrs now live freely in Evangless, where satyrs are the second 
most populous race. There are still a lot of satyrs living as servants 
in Zelhost and Siyesh, but many escape their bonds and become free in 
Evangless or other nations that do not accept slavery.
     







      Traits of a Satyr
     



      Alcohol Immunity: Satyrs are not negatively affected by alcohol.
     



      Speed:
 You have an amazing 35 foot movement speed. You have a swim speed of 10
 feet and a climbing speed of 10 feet.
     



      Empathetic:
 When attempting to determine if somebody is lying, you are allowed to 
roll twice and take the higher result.
     







      Random Racial Traits
     



      1        Born
 Hero: When using Heroics (found under the Spirit attribute), roll twice
 and take the higher result.
     



      2        Brothers-in-Arms:
 The hardships the satyrs have undergone over the years has not broken 
them down but brought them together in brotherhood. When you are 
adjacent to a satyr ally, you both gain a +2 to accuracy. This effect 
does not stack if the other satyr also has this story.
     



      3        Built
 to Last: The Haudi Empire designed the satyrs for harsh labor and thus 
made sure their creations wouldn’t tire easily. You are no exception. 
You gain an additional 6 hit points.
     



      4        Expecting
 the Worst: Your natural awareness of people’s emotions gives you a good
 insight into when a situation’s about to turn sour. You gain a +4 on 
priority rolls.
     



      5        Fleet
 of Foot: You’re one of the fastest creatures around. Your movement 
speed increases by 10 feet, bringing your 35 feet movement speed up to 
45 feet.
     



      6        Frightening
 Combatant: Your horns and hooves can be used as weapons. Your unarmed 
attacks have a damage class of 4.
     



      7        Horned
 & Dangerous: You keep the ends of your horns clean and sharp, 
making unarmed attacks with them deal 1 point of unsoakable bleeding 
damage.
     



      8        Natural
 High: Alcohol is a stimulant for satyrs, not a depressant. You can 
ignore the effects of fatigue if you’ve consumed alcohol in the past few
 hours. If you remain fatigued for more than a few days, even alcohol 
won’t help.
     



      9        Poison
 Immunity: Your model was engineered to work with hazardous chemicals. 
Whenever rolling to resist a poison through Brute, your roll is one tier
 higher than it otherwise would be.
     



      10        Protector:
 The satyr culture has imprinted your mind with a compulsion to defend 
those close to you. All allies adjacent to you gain a +2 to defense.
     



      11        Stable
 Hoofing: Your hooves are firm, catching the ground with ease. You 
ignore the speed penalties for crossing minor and unsteady rough 
terrains.
     



      12        Unphased
 by War: Though you sympathize with people’s fear of battle, the rush of
 the battlefield spurs you on. When you are attempting to resist being 
stunned, you gain a +4 on the roll.
     




















      Chapter 4: Context
     







      Everything needs some context.
     



      You
 need to put your character into the context of the world. The context 
is the setting, your nationality, a religion, some organizations, it’s 
the world around you, it’s everything. This is the context of your 
adventure.
     



      As
 you’re developing your character, you can use this chapter as much or 
as little as you’d like. There are a ton of stories that you can choose 
from in here (take what you want!). If you just want to make a bland, 
background-free gun-toting maniac (and believe me, we all do), feel free
 to skip this chapter. For some depth to your character, you can stop 
here for some context.
     



      If
 your narrator has decided not to use the Tephra setting, then you can 
use this chapter for some ideas or dismiss it entirely in favor of your 
narrator’s setting, nationalities, religions, and other such fun pieces 
of context.
     







      Evanglessians
     



      The
 new capital of humanity, Evangless is growing quickly and thriving all 
the same. Less than a century old, Evangless was founded by a brilliant 
woman named Velkya, who pioneered the steam engine and numerous other 
technologies that are still being deciphered today. Her great cities set
 the foundation for an unshakable nation and her thoughts for a 
strong-willed, proud people. Evangless grew to its prime before the 
Hurricane Wars between the surface and the ocean-faring ayodin, and, 
despite numerous setbacks, the Evanglessians still hold the center of 
the continent.
     



      Evanglessians
 are typically fair skinned, some with freckles. Their hair colors vary,
 but are often lighter shades of brown, blond, and occasionally red. 
Their eyes, too, vary between the lighter colors.
     



      The
 nation of Evangless has immense pride, powerful industry, and a 
world-class railway system. The military of Evangless is, by far, the 
world’s most elite, and Evangless’s rather large population and control 
over the continent’s most fertile lands helps cement their military 
dominance.
     



      Evangless
 has long been insecure with its relations with the remnants of the 
Haudi Empire, who they consider a real threat. Yet even more so now, the
 airborne Paldorans have become Evangless’s true menace, as the nation 
without a homeland has largely chosen Evangless as its primary raiding 
spot. And though Evangless’s own airborne navy is powerful, it has yet 
to put any serious stop to Paldorus.
     



      Meanwhile,
 the arts and culture of Evangless continue to strive on. The 
Evanglessians elite, almost all of which are immeasurably wealthy 
industrial barons, have spearheaded technological development and begun 
funding scientists whenever possible. Aether manipulation technology has
 most quickly grown in Evangless since the aether disaster befell 
Paldorus and crushed Paldorus’s astounding research speed. Evangless is 
the center of the human world, with technology, industry, and 
agriculture all uniting to form a thriving and cohesive culture.
     







      Ethnic Traits
     



      The
 people of Evangless, regardless of their race, are known for their 
light-colored skin and their blonde to brunette hair, their eyes varying
 from dark browns to greens to blues. Evanglessians come in all shapes 
and sizes and as such have reputations for being vastly more open-minded
 about strange customs than their neighboring countries.
     



      Evangless
 is a melting pot of the cultures of Rilausia, although the people of 
Evangless have noticeable common mannerisms. Evanglessians are polite 
and proper without being weak-willed or prudish. They are a proud people
 forged in the fires of conquest, although they remain young and 
impressionable. A large majority of the Evanglessian workforce is war 
veterans, whether it be middle-aged retirees who expanded their national
 borders in the Hurricane Wars or newcomers to the workforce who took 
sides during the Evanglessian Civil War. While far from being 
bloodthirsty or savage, the people of Evangless often use their military
 experience as a way of connecting with one another, using old war 
stories as anecdotal banter during polite conversation. Evanglessians 
pride themselves on their skill in the art of mannerly dialogue and 
generally will have trouble responding positively to outlandish or 
violent behavior.
     







      Foreign Relations & Stereotypes
     



      Despite
 their gentlemanly demeanors and friendly attitudes, the people of 
Evangless have some long-standing grudges. Freshest on the list are the 
Paldoran exiles, especially those involved in piracy for their aerial 
empire. Some Evanglessians distinguish between Paldoran pirates and 
Paldoran refugees, but many discriminate against all those of Paldoran 
descent.
     



      A
 great deal of Hurricane Wars veterans, along with their families, hate 
seawater ayodin for their declaration of war on the surface. That being 
said, the great number of freshwater ayodin who stood beside them on the
 battlefield have quelled the chances of widespread ayodin prejudice.
     



      Velkya
 stole the land she used to build Evangless from the Haudi Empire, and 
over a century and a half later Hauds and Evanglessians still bicker. 
Many Evanglessians see Hauds as narrow-minded and stuck in the past, 
stating that the Haudi nations are far beyond their prime. However, 
Evanglessians and Hauds rarely act on their mutual distrust, other than 
the occasional alcohol-induced bar fight between zealous patriots.
     



      Evanglessians
 and Izedans have cooperated with each other numerous times in the past.
 This coupled with the large number of Izedan immigrants now living in 
Evangless, the two cultures get along easily. The same is mostly true 
with Dalvozzeans as well. Evangless and Dalvozzea are the two newest 
superpowers on the continent of Rilausia, but luckily the two of them 
have so far avoided stepping on each others’ toes. Many farishtaa have 
immigrated to Evangless to see if they cannot rise above the caste 
society they were born into, some even opening farishtaa-conversion labs
 on Evanglessian soil, opening up business for any willing elf.
     



















      p Nationality Stories M
     



      Below
 are some nationality stories you can select. While most adventurers 
will only have one (if any) of these stories, you might find that 
several apply to you.
     







      Royalist   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      During
 the Civil War, you sided with the automaton armies of Emperor Deylus 
Luthricien, and thus get along better with other Royalists.
     







      Militarist   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      While
 the Civil War was raging, you fought against the rise of the current 
emperor, instead siding with the military coup and the majority of the 
populous.
     







      Veteran   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      You
 fought in the Civil War. Regardless of which side you were on, you have
 plenty of war stories that allow you to entertain fellow Evanglessians.
     







      Settler of the West   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      As
 a frontiersman out in the formerly gnome-occupied land of Western 
Evangless you’ve spent some time with ranch animals. You can easily calm
 and direct most forms of livestock.
     







      Naturalized Tharmurian   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Whether
 you welcomed them with open arms or scorned the advances of their army,
 Tharmuris and its people now bow to the Evanglessian throne. Your white
 hair and pale complexion make other Evanglessians see you as a 
foreigner.
     







      Evanglessian Nobility   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      As
 a member of a noble house in Evangless you are given unrestricted 
access to government-run buildings, save those requiring high levels of 
clearance.
     







      Adopted by Evangless   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      You
 may not have been born here, but the open-minded culture of Evangless 
has thoroughly assimilated you. You may have one nationality story from a
 different nationality. If you previously had more than one, you may 
choose which story to keep.
     







      Ayodin of the Exodus   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Requires: Ayodin
     



      You
 left the armies behind during the Hurricane Wars, joining the 
“surfacers” in their fight against his genocide. You’re held in high 
regard by Evanglessians old enough to remember yet young enough to care.
     











      Dalvozzeans
     



      Dalvozzea
 is the jewel of Rilausia, a nation which plays host to the High 
Rilausia Forest, the dense jungle which covers nearly the entire 
country, known for its scenic vistas. Dalvozzea is the only 
farishtaa-ruled nation in Rilausia, ruled by the Nine Wings of Divinity,
 the most elite members of the farishtaa Day Society. They insure the 
elves never rise above their second-class status, cementing their 
national power base. Dalvozzea is very inwardly focused, as almost every
 city and region is self-sustaining. They have very little contact with 
their continental neighbors and many farishtaa never leave their home 
cities.
     



      The
 social structure of Dalvozzea focuses primarily on the farishtaa. 
Powerful members of the race known as Day Society, a caste of winged 
farishtaa, rule absolutely over the Night Society, the average 
farishtaa. All farishtaa hold sway over the elves, which dwell at the 
bottom of the caste system. Only a few places in Dalvozzea are elven 
friendly: Miadru and Adoipa, gnomish and elven settlements respectively.
 Adoipa holds the seat of Girazza, the elven scientist who invented the 
farishtaa, who regrets his discovery deeply.
     



      Dalvozzea
 has little in the way of a standing military and relies primarily on 
mercenary components to support their endeavors. Their airpower, though 
limited, is a sight to behold, as farishtaas hold an innate talent for 
flight and aerial maneuvers and their vessels reflect those values.
     



      These
 elite pilots and their vessels guard the nation’s borders zealously 
with a sporting attitude, hunting airship pirates like noblemen on a 
foxhunt.
     



      p Ethnic Traits M
     



      Internationally
 known for their chestnut skin, preconceived notions of Dalvozzeans 
changed with the creation of the commonly light-skinned farishtaa. 
Regardless of their race, the people of Dalvozzea are easily 
distinguishable by their hair. Thin and wiry without being weak, 
Dalvozzean hair comes in deep, dark shades of almost any imaginable 
color. Dalvozzeans are also taller and more slender than the norm for 
their respective races.
     



      Used
 to their caste-based society, Dalvozzeans treat those in authority 
positions with respect. The obvious exception to this rule are the 
unknown number of Dalvozzeans living outside of civilization in the High
 Rilausian Forest. Many “citizens” still live off the land as nomadic 
hunters and gatherers. These brave men and women are far from primitive,
 many employing prototype technology to get what they need while still 
endeavoring to keep the forest intact.
     



      Some
 Dalvozzeans fight against the rigid structure of their culture. Ashen 
Angels and other social movements (or terrorist cells as they’re called 
by the government) believe the castes are outdated and oppressive, 
although these groups are relatively small.
     



      p Foreign Relations & Stereotypes M
     



      Dalvozzea
 is the newest of the Rilausian nations. This is a task they 
accomplished without enemies outside the Haudi Empire. Like Evangless, 
Dalvozzea stole their land from its Haudi rulers. Unlike their southern 
neighbor, Dalvozzea waged bloody war with the Hauds to gain their 
independence. With Haud-ruled Siyesh on their western border, tensions 
run deep between Dalvozzeans and Hauds from the motherland.
     



      Dalvozzean
 patriots occasionally bicker with Izedans. Used to the lush flora of 
the High Rilausian Forest, the infamously well-educated Dalvozzeans see 
Izedan scavengers as ignorant people obsessed with useless ruins. Many 
Izedans are staunchly against the farishtaa-conversion process, another 
point of contention.
     



      Some
 Dalvozzean youth are known to joke about the quality of Evanglessian 
education, since most Evanglessian aristocrats send their spoiled-rotten
 offspring to Dalvozzean universities. This stereotype fades with age, 
especially amongst Dalvozzeans who meet the numerous prim and proper 
Evanglessians visiting their cities for business, vacation, or school.
     



      Dalvozzea
 isn’t known for its waterways, and as such ayodin are a rare sight 
within its borders. Equally rare are Paldorans; Dalvozzea is simply too 
far north for the Paldorans, pirates or otherwise, to conveniently 
reach. Most Dalvozzeans have reacted to these facts by treating the 
ayodin and Paldorans they meet with utmost courtesy while thinking 
themselves ambassadors for their people.
     



      p Daion M
     



      Deep
 in the High Rilausian Forest, looming over the dense green canopies, 
rises the white marble towers of Daion. These towers form the homes for 
the farishtaas, the taller towers homing the wealthiest farishtaas. The 
tallest tower among them is Aeon’s Summit. Atop the summit the Nine 
Wings of Divinity meet, the nine Day Society farishtaas that 
collectively govern Daion and the larger affairs of Dalvozzea.
     



      The
 Day Society spends their time in comfort and laziness. These farishtaas
 overlook the forest from their high terraces, living decadent and 
sometimes immoral lifestyles. The universities of Daion are housed in 
these towers, where nobility send their children from all over Rilausia 
to study. Daion is well known for having the best pilots, and the 
nobility will often pass their time hunting for airship pirates like the
 Evanglessian gentry hunt foxes.
     



      While
 the farishtaas live in white towers and comfort, the city of Daion 
below the canopy is something entirely different. Packed to the breaking
 point, Daion is an amalgamation of elves, mercenaries, and people who 
are there because they can’t go anywhere else. The canopy and 
smog-blowing factories keep the under-canopy of Daion dark even on the 
brightest days.
     



      p Nationality Stories M
     



      Below
 are some nationality stories you can select. While most adventurers 
will only have one (if any) of these stories, you might find that 
several apply to you.
     







      Member of the Night Society   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Requires: Farishtaa
     



      Nearly
 all farishtaa of Dalvozzea belong to the Night Society. The middle 
caste of your culture, you are free to enjoy all facilities in Dalvozzea
 except those places reserved for the Day Society.
     







      Second Generation Farishtaa   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Requires: Farishtaa
     



      As
 a child of two farishtaa parents, you have no knowledge of what it’s 
like to be an elf, causing most elves you encounter to look upon you 
with jealousy.
     







      White-Tower Mercenary   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Selected
 by the Day Society to protect their ivory palaces from the disgusting 
rabble below, you are held in equal regard to members of the Night 
Society. If you’re both a White-Tower Merc and a Member of the Night 
Society, you enjoy a significantly larger amount of prestige than either
 group individually.
     







      Ashen Angel   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      The
 tattoo on your body of black feathers reminds you of the wings you will
 never possess. A rebel against the Day Society, you instantly get along
 with kindred spirits throughout Dalvozzea. Better cover your feathers 
though, law enforcement will treat you as a terrorist if they see your 
markings.
     







      Elf of Adoipa   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Requires: Elf
     



      You
 come from the elven city-state of Adoipa, run by Girazza the Devourer. 
Elves from other places look up to you as a scion of a future of 
equality which many see as impossible.
     















      Savage Elf   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      The
 concept of civilization is lost on you. You’re much more accustomed to 
the life of a hunter and gatherer, travelling through the High Rilausian
 Forest, living as your ancestors had for centuries. You can easily 
survive indefinite amounts of time in any forested area without 
provisions.
     







      Highborne Elf   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Requires: Elf
     



      Some
 elves can trace their lineage to the noble families who lorded over 
their fellow elves before the farishtaa were created and seized control 
of elven society. While still looked down upon, you are held in slightly
 higher regard than the average elf.
     







      Miadruid   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Requires: Gnome
     



      Primarily
 consisting of gnomes, the province of Miadru is free from the caste 
system of Dalvozzea...at least while no Day Society member is visiting. 
You get along royally with Dalvozzeans who do not ascribe themselves to 
the Day or Night Society.
     







      Nine Wings of Divinity
     



      Since
 Raviziel formed the Nine Wings of Divinity over a century ago, the Nine
 Wings have stood as the permanent and unyielding backbone of Dalvozzea.
 Composed of only the nine most elite winged farishtaas - the Day 
Society - the Nine Wings served as a symbol of Dalvozzea’s new angelic 
grace, meeting atop the enormous Aeon’s Summit that scrapes against the 
heavens.
     



      Two
 years ago, the Nine Wings’ pristine image was shattered. Its founder, 
Raviziel, lost control. Girazza gained primal control over his body, and
 the angelic Raviziel, the first farishtaa, reverted back to its 
original owner - Girazza, the elf that created the farishtaa conversion 
process. Enraged, Girazza tore off his own jaw and replaced it with an 
essence-devouring mechanism. In one night, he killed three members of 
the Nine Wings and drained their body of all synthetic essence. He left a
 fourth member half-drained and stark mad. Within the same night he 
started a revolt in the under-canopy that would become known as the 
Night of Feathers.
     



      Girazza
 left the Nine Wings with only five surviving members, one of which with
 little sanity intact. They’ve since had to rebuild and work to 
recapture their decimated image. With four new members, the Nine Wings 
are doing everything they can to reclaim the order they once commanded.
     







      Izedans
     



      Of
 the human nationalities, the izedans are perhaps the most peculiar. 
Hailing from the vast deserts of Izeda, few could imagine anybody 
calling that hellhole a home. Yet the izedans have done just that, and 
their culture reflects their harsh climate.
     



      Sometimes
 known as the sunborne, the Izedans have pale, almost yellow, skin. 
They’re commonly bald (and women often shave their heads), and many of 
them develop discolorations on their exposed skin.
     



      Izedans
 live as scavengers. Though there are some Izedan cities, they are rare 
and far apart. Izedans often live as nomads, tending their herds and 
living off what little the land provides. They’re quite accustomed to 
the heat, and survive well in poor climates.
     



      The
 entire culture has an almost religious devotion to pain. Ritual 
scarification is well known through Izeda, and pain is a daily part of 
life. Adulthood is proven through tests of endurance, and, by proxy, the
 medicine men of the Izedans are some of the best in the world. Izedans 
rarely stagger under a blow, having spent their entire lives pushing 
themselves to the extreme.
     



      Despite
 their unusual customs, the Izedans can be quite hospitable. Izedans 
cherish their friends and are highly protective of them. A friend of 
Izeda is a man with a long life ahead of him. Nonetheless, Izedans often
 have a hard time relating to and understanding most other cultures, and
 Izedans who leave the desert adapt poorly to the comforts of modern, 
industrial living.
     



      Though
 Izedans are not as engineering as the other human nations, they do well
 with what they have. While others have created powerful rifles, the 
izedans still hold true to their crossbows; and their steam-powered, 
high caliber crossbows are some of the most vicious weapons ever seen. 
Izedans travel in large armored caravans, pulled by great beasts of 
burden that only the Izedans could tame. Izedan merchants will often 
work along the outskirts of Izeda, bartering off their unusual 
collections in exchange for food and other knickknacks they can trade 
elsewhere.
     



      p Ethnic Traits M
     



      Short
 and stocky, the bleach-white skinned Izedans are a hardy people, bred 
to last in the harsh desert wasteland of the Quist. Stereotyped as being
 jolly and flippant, Izedans are extremely hard workers who live off of 
whatever they can scavenge. Lovers of tall tales, many outsiders 
consider it an incomparable experience to sit and watch an Izedan 
campfire. Most Izedans have little hair on the tops of their head, 
although they have no difficulty growing thick mutton chops or full 
beards. Of the few Izedan satyrs, many cut or trim their legs to avoid 
heat stroke.
     



      Elven
 Izedans, many of whom have family lines in the Quist predating the rise
 of Izeda, are completely intermixed with their non-elven compatriots. 
They are held as equals in Izedan caravans and have, over time, grown to
 appear distinctly different than the elves who inhabit the rest of the 
continent. Izedan elves have spines more bent than their forest-dwelling
 peers, with longer, thicker arms they sometimes use to run on all 
fours. Their skins’ texture is rugged to the touch and light-brown in 
texture, making them camouflage into the sand more easily. Their hair is
 also longer than the average elf, shielding their long backs from 
harmful sunlight and keeping them cool when they need to be. Because of 
their separation from the castes of Dalvozzea, most Izedan elves see the
 farishtaa-conversion process as a shameful equivalent to suicide and 
refuse to partake.
     



      p Foreign Relations & Stereotypes M
     



      Izedans
 are an amicable people who rarely have problems with anyone. In 
addition, since they are hardly a true nation, they rarely deal with 
foreign affairs or politics of any kind. The Quist may house the ruins 
of Izeda, but no nation cares particularly for claiming a stake in 
anything lost in its burning sands. Izedans and their neighboring gnomes
 of Valdru have always had good relations, the former often trading 
scrap parts for sustenance from the latter. Many Valdruid gnomes have 
joined Izedan caravans over the years, hoping for adventure and 
discovery. Izedans and Hauds have never gotten along. Fueling this fact 
is the knowledge that they are the longest surviving nationalities on 
the continent, both predating recorded history. Their mutual longevities
 have given the two groups centuries of chances to be at each other’s 
throats. Satyrs and Izedans from all walks of life are inseparable 
allies as long as they stay outside of a bar.
     



      Izedans
 were entirely separated from the brutal Hurricane Wars, though many 
left to assist their allies abroad. The vast majority of Izedans have 
never seen an ayodin before and are often known to act like curious 
schoolchildren upon first meeting one. Evangless was the main reason why
 many Izedans joined against the seawater ayodin. At the time, numerous 
Evanglessian anthropologists were studying Izedan culture when they 
recieved the radio transmissions of the coastal attacks. Young Izedans 
wanting to prove themselves as impassable warriors followed the 
anthropologists home and enlisted in the Evanglessian military.
     



      p Nationality Stories M
     



      Below
 are some nationality stories you can select. While most adventurers 
will only have one (if any) of these stories, you might find that 
several apply to you.
     







      Disciple of Pain   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      You
 follow the Severing. You have ritually scarred yourself in honor of 
your heritage, following in the path of the Scarred One who fought off 
the fearsome Hauds and survived when none could. You have no fear of 
pain and have made it part of your life. Though you may die from wounds,
 pain will not slow you down.
     







      Raised to Scavenge   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      The
 ancient deserts of the Quist hold many secrets, pieces and parts that 
must be cobbled together to make new treasures. You were raised to take 
the trash of the desert and sell it for a living. To you, even the most 
petty of objects can be scavenged and sold in the market.
     







      Asagnu Caravaneer   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      The
 caravan of the ancient Izedan kings, you are of the caravan that is 
most strong, most proud. No other caravan can match yours in terms of 
military might, tradition, or breadth. All other caravans are beneath 
yours, especially the Caravan of Sapience, the superstitious rebels that
 caused the Izeda Kingdom to collapse so many years ago. All other 
caravans should pay yours with the rightful respects.
     







      Caravaneer of Sapience   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      You
 are from one of the branches of the oldest, most sacred caravan: the 
caravan of Sapience. Sapience, the Queen of Vultures who rules over 
southern Izeda, will always look over you. You have a strong affinity 
with vultures and know many who have kept them as pets. The dead are a 
source of food, and flight is best fit for the birds.
     







      Sunrage Elf   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Requires: Elf
     



      You
 are an elf from the harsh deserts of the Quist, living and growing 
among the Izeda people. You are not used to the normal prejudices that 
elves from the north experience, but you are stalwart and proud, ready 
to bear any obstacle. Outsiders will often fear you for your unusual 
appearance, but you can weather even the worst of comments.
     







      Paldoran Exiles
     



      Flying
 the skies of Tephra, the Paldoran Exiles live in enormous Stormships, 
raiding and pillaging towns for food and supplies. Years ago, the lands 
of Paldorus were ravaged by radiation that destroyed the land and 
mutilated the populace. Today, many of the survivors live in these 
enormous raiding ships, dooming any town they mark as their prey.
     



      The
 Paldorans are a proud, strong people. They’re easily identified for 
their dark brown skin and eyes of icy, almost crystalline, blue. They’ve
 grown accustomed to the harsh living above the cloudlines, where the 
cutting winds and chill make life constantly difficult.
     



      Lead
 by powerful airship captains and faithful to the Infernal Jinzium 
Church, the Paldoran Exiles have become a force to be reckoned with. 
They prowl the world with advanced weaponry developed during the 
Hurricane Wars and have lost their remorse for the other nations that 
they must now pillage in order to survive. For Paldorans, survival of 
the fittest is not just an empty phrase. It is a way of life.
     



      p Ethnic Traits M
     



      The
 darkest-skinned ethnicity on Rilausia, Paldorans are also known for 
their bright blue eyes which, up-close, look almost crystalline. While 
most Paldorans have dark hair which refuses to grey with age, many 
Paldorans have opted to dye streaks of their hair silver or gold tones 
to increase their individuality on Stormships where military uniforms 
are the unrelenting dress code.
     



      p Foreign Relations & Stereotypes M
     



      Paldorans
 are far from the most popular nationality on Rilausia. Ostracized for 
their refugee status, Paldorans inside and outside the fleet suffer from
 untrusting glances from most people they meet. Exiles have received the
 warmest welcome from the open-minded Evanglessians.
     



      Many
 Paldorans have a minor phobia of Zel Hauds. Archduke Zimarati of 
Zelhost seems to enjoy shooting down Paldoran airships, although he 
hasn’t shown issue letting landborne Paldorans into his borders to work 
in his innumerable foundries.
     



      Paldorans
 have the most trouble dealing with saltwater ayodin. Still openly 
hostile with each other, the start of their sour relationship was the 
Hurricane Wars. The Paldoran air force used aether-based cannons to 
superheat patches of ocean, literally boiling ayodin legions alive. 
Paldorans now avoid flight over the oceans, for it would lead to 
bloodshed.
     











      p Becoming Exiles M
     



      For
 years the Paldorans led the world in numerous scientific advances. 
During the Hurricane Wars, the Paldorans were the undisputed leaders in 
wartime technological advances. Though they can’t claim that they 
invented aether resonation, they pioneered many of the advances 
thereafter. When the freshwater ayodin came ashore, it was the Paldorans
 that took the graviton sphere engines of the ayodin and began building 
ironbirds and skyships. For years, the Paldorans defended their 
coastlines against ayodin attacks, using enormous engines of war, 
super-heating their water with aether, and flying over the oceans in 
enormous airships. But those advances would also be the Paldorans’ 
undoing.
     



      A
 decade ago, a rash of diseases spread across Paldorus. Physicians 
compared it to radiation, for the infected’s skin would grow dry and 
cracked, almost like stone. Over 70% of the infected died while 20% 
survived with the unusual skin deformities. A rare few survived with 
few, if any, visual defects, as their bodies learned to cope and repress
 the radiation.
     



      The
 infection did not stop with the populace. The fields of Paldorus were 
decimated by the radiation. In hindsight, the Paldorans could have seen 
the plague coming, for it hit the crops first. What crops it didn’t 
kill, it mutated and changed, making the food virtually inedible.
     



      In
 the midst of the plague, scientists discovered its source: the aether 
resonators that Paldorans relied on in their everyday life. The 
resonators that the Paldorans had manufactured for war were leaking 
radiation across the nation, and, over time, had begun to kill and 
mutate everyone who used them on a regular basis.
     



      The
 people panicked. Many turned to the Paldoran church - Infernal Jinzium -
 for guidance. And the church responded, revealing a plan to escape the 
radiation that had claimed their homeland. The church unveiled enormous 
graviton spheres, none smaller than a house. These graviton spheres were
 beyond the scope of any known spheres currently in use today, and the 
church already knew how to use them. “We have begun work on new ships, 
ships that will carry an entire city’s worth of people,” said Lucius 
Yaroslav, the head of the Infernal Church. “Jinzi has given us these 
gifts to raise our people out of Paldorus! With them, we shall build the
 Infernal Colony Ships and live among the clouds, closest to our savior,
 Jinzi.”
     



      These
 Infernal Colony Ships were built, constructed of mismatched parts on a 
solid steel frame. At their heart, the enormous graviton spheres found 
by the Church. With the king’s blessing, the church appropriated 
numerous airships, breaking them down to basic components and using them
 to build their colony ships. Millions moved to Erodin, the Paldoran 
capital, as these ships were built, expediting the process, but also 
clogging the city with miscreants and refugees. And, after a year of 
work, the Infernal Colony Ships were prepared.
     



      These
 ships would become known as Stormships across the rest of Rilausia. At 
their smallest, they carried tens of thousands of Paldorans escaping 
Paldorus. From a distance, it is said, a Stormship looks like an 
encroaching storm cloud.
     



      When
 the Stormships lifted off from Paldorus, they did so leaving their king
 and families behind. Paldorus was splintered. The colony ships were 
built simply to wait out the radiation and return to Paldorus soon 
thereafter. But luck was not on their side.
     



      Deal with the Devil
     



      King
 Agyros Caeliph was an ancient king. His two sons left in the Stormships
 - one as a captain, the other as a ranking member of the Infernal 
Church. The king knew that his land would take many years to recover. He
 knew that the Valdruid gnomes to the west and the Zel Hauds of the 
north were being overrun by Paldoran refugees (and, in the case of 
Zelhost, the treatment of the refugees could, at best, be described as 
poor). The king needed a way to improve the quality of Paldorus’s land, 
and quickly.
     



      He
 contacted Jayro Tiin, a gnomish merchant lord who governed the 
city-state of Ristvale. Ristvale had been accepting of the Paldoran 
refugees, and Jayro Tiin had a reputation for his understanding of 
bio-engineering and the gnomish growth sciences. Jayro Tiin made a deal 
with the Paldoran King to restore the land of Paldorus - and he’d do so 
for free.
     



      Though
 the king accepted the deal, he would only later realize that Jayro’s 
definition of free was well out of his price range. Jayro Tiin unveiled 
his most wicked machine and ran death and mutations across Paldorus. He 
caused the nation’s vegetation to grow and run wild, Jayro using 
Paldorus as his own enormous scientific experiment. By the time the 
Stormships could return to Paldorus, there was no homeland left to 
return to. The nation was overrun by wild, mutated creatures. The people
 that survived were more monster than human, and the Paldoran exiles had
 nowhere to turn to.
     



      p Nationality Stories M
     



      Below
 are some nationality stories you can select. While most adventurers 
will only have one (if any) of these stories, you might find that 
several apply to you.
     







      Signs of Radiation   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      You
 thought you had escaped the radiation, but your skin has since started 
peeling, graying, turning to ash. Though it’s minor and purely on the 
surface, the signs are obvious: you were irradiated.
     







      Stowaway   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      When
 the stormships left Erodin, many people could not fit. But, where your 
name was not on the list, you made room for yourself. You stowed on 
board, hiding in the underbelly of the ship. Perhaps you were discovered
 and sent to the surface. Perhaps you were discovered and made yourself 
useful. Yet the facts remain unchanged: you were not invited to the 
stormships, and cannot be a citizen of the colony.
     







      Chosen by Jinzi   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Many
 were invited to join the Infernal Colony Ships of Paldorus, but you 
were personally asked by a member of the Infernal Church of Jinzium. You
 were chosen by the sun god to lead the Paldoran people away from the 
mutated land and into the skies. Let none doubt your worth.
     







      Paldoran Militant   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Where
 the church built the ships, it is the Paldoran military that runs them.
 You are or were a member of the Paldoran military, commanding the ship 
and leading the raids that supply it. If you are noted as a Paldoran 
militant in most other nations, you will be, at best, shunned. At worst,
 hung for crimes of piracy. But a militant must do what is necessary to 
ensure that his people survive, and you did nothing less than that.
     







      Grounded Exile   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      You
 were a citizen aboard an Infernal Colony Ship, but you committed an act
 or were not found worthy enough to stay aboard. Perhaps you were not 
keeping pace with your peers. Perhaps the ship could not support its 
population. Perhaps you committed a crime and were sent to the surface. 
Either way, you were grounded and may not return to your original 
stormship. You are no longer a citizen of the Air Empire.
     







      Stormship Engineer   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      When
 the stormships were being built by the Church, you were hired to work 
on them. When they lifted off, you lived in the engine rooms, working as
 an engineer, ensuring that the ships stayed aloft. Your position, 
perhaps more so than even the ship’s captain, was the most important. 
Among other Paldorans, you are shown great respect for your work. You 
have extensive skill with Engineering and automatically start off with a
 point in that skill.
     







      Zel Hauds
     



      The
 Haudi Empire once stood dominant across the continent, the complete 
rulers of their domain. The Hauds consider themselves the blessed race, 
and the slow collapse of the Empire has done little to dissuade them of 
that notion. The seat of their fallen Empire lies in the rugged northern
 lands of Siyesh among tall mountains and rough terrain. A people forged
 in harsh conditions, the strength of the Hauds reflects their 
motherland.
     



      The
 Zel Hauds themselves live far from their ancestral northern home. 
Separated from Siyesh by the massive Evangless, the Hauds of Zelhost, 
often shortened to Zel Hauds, are an industrial people whose countryside
 is carpeted with manufactories, warehouses, and chemical plants from 
border to border.  Under their peerless leader Archduke Zimarati, 
the Zel Hauds have been growing increasingly independent from the 
northern throne. In the matriarchal land of Zelhost, you must prove 
yourself worthy of power and respect. To Zimarati’s people, the failures
 of the Haudi Empress in Siyesh have cost her their respect, although 
she still clings to their loyalty.
     



      p Ethnic Traits M
     



      For
 most Hauds, six feet is considered short. Easily the tallest of all the
 ethnicities, Hauds have bred themselves to be lofty in height, 
physically strong, and built to beat people to a pulp when it is called 
for. Haudi women are actually taller than the men, and women hold 
significantly more positions of power than their male counterparts. 
Hauds are known for their thick, course hair of light colors, but their 
varied skin tones are all colored in dark shades that many people say 
resembles stone. Their features are all very pronounced, their jawlines 
rigid, and their teeth, always frighteningly white, are long and sharp 
looking, making them look as feral as a civilized people can.
     



      While
 Siyeshi Hauds dress in traditional flowing leathers and cloths 
depending on the heat, Zel Hauds augment these outfits with more modern 
Evanglessian eccentricities such as derby hats and ties.
     



      p Foreign Relations & Stereotypes M
     



      The
 Haudi Empire has a proud history of advancing the sciences and never 
taking no for an answer. The means to this end, the Hauds built their 
empire on the backs of enslaved humans, gnomes, and satyrs. There are 
scant few ethnicities in Rilausia today that can’t find ancestors who 
were enslaved by the Haudi Empire. The Empire pioneered the fields of 
alchemy and bio-engineering (though the gnomes played a vital role in 
bio-engineering). After all, it was the Hauds who bio-engineered the 
satyrs, a species created to be the ultimate servants of the Empire.
     



      In
 the years since the Empire’s decline, the capital cities in Siyesh have
 crumbled while the industries in Zelhost have prospered. While their 
Siyeshi sisters still see the satyrs as their property, Zel Hauds, much 
more kindly, see satyrs as a simple-minded inferior creatures whose only
 use is serving their mother species. Some Zel Hauds still keep satyr 
slaves, although this is a dying trend. Most satyrs of Zelhost are 
employed as low-level factory workers and servants.
     



      Despite
 being so greatly separated from its motherland, Zelhost has inherited 
much of the long held racism and elitism toward its surrounding nations.
 Izedans and Evanglessians care not that Zelhost has rejected Siyesh as 
its sovereign; a Haud is a Haud. In return, after witnessing the rise of
 Evangless in his country’s backyard, Archduke Zimarati stays ready to 
invade his fledgling neighbor at the first signs of aggression. Zimarati
 also has an invasion of the largely abandoned Paldorus on his military 
agenda, unbeknownst to the Paldoran migrants now working in his 
foundries.
     



      The
 invasion of Khemli, Zelhost’s capital city, was one of the first major 
battles of the Hurricane Wars. Ayodin bombers levelled the city using 
graviton technology that far surpassed the Haudi Aero-Navy at the time. 
In response the Zel Hauds did two things. The first was filling their 
nation with advanced anti-air guns and far reaching train tracks to move
 them. The second was throwing the few ayodin found within their borders
 into wartime prisons. In the years since the war Zel Hauds have moved 
past this paranoid racism; the families of the ayodin victims have not.
     







      p Nationality Stories M
     



      Below
 are some nationality stories you can select. While most adventurers 
will only have one (if any) of these stories, you might find that 
several apply to you.
     







      Imperial Traditionalist   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      While
 you are a citizen of Zelhost, you pledge allegiance to the true rulers 
of the Haudi Empire: the empress in Siyesh. You get along with Hauds 
from Siyesh far better than your countrymen, who feel a foul taste in 
their mouth whenever you fondly talk about “the old country.”
     







      Matriarch   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Requires: Female
     



      Haudi culture is run by powerful women and you happen to be one of them. Haudi men feel compelled to bow to you on sight.
     







      Satyr Servant   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Requires: Satyr
     



      You
 formerly were, or unfortunately still are, the vassal of a Haudi lord. 
Muscle memory makes you flinch or cower when a Haud raises his hand to 
strike you outside of combat.
     







      Honor without Etiquette   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      While
 outsiders may see you as uncouth or low-class, other Hauds see right to
 your core. Your countrymen can tell how respectable you are with a 
single glance.
     







      National Pasttime   a
     







      Nationality Story
     



      Hauds
 are known for their mastery of the alchemical sciences. You know a 
little more about alchemical theory than the average person, giving you a
 +4 to Sciences when attempting to determine what augments an alchemical
 solution contains.
     







      Organizations
     



      p The Brimstones M
     



      Sovereigns
 of dust and dirt for as far as the eye can see, the Brimstone Gang 
rules the western wilds in the name of the cattle barons who fund and 
support them. They enforce the laws of the land, although these laws are
 more often than not of their own creation. The Brimstones also keep a 
keen eye over the ranches and homesteads of their territory.
     



      Begun
 by the cattle barons of western Evangless, the Brimstones are a loose 
coalition of former gangs and ex-convicts brought together to keep the 
barons in power. With numbers and monetary backing, the Brimstone Gang 
has become the new aristocracy of the western wilds through service to 
the barons, and they mean to keep it that way.
     



      With
 a reputation for political assassinations and similar dirty deeds, the 
Brimstones operate solely for the sake of money. No job is beneath them 
as long as the pay is high enough. With the numbers they possess, the 
completion of a job is often a matter of quantity, not quality, but 
results are results in the Brimstones’ eyes. The versatility of their 
members, covering everything from simple thugs to stellar marksmen, 
ensures well paying jobs as the norm.
     



      The
 Brimstones believe in small government, preferably with their own 
members sitting in seats of comfort and power. They discourage the other
 powers from eastern Evangless from interfering in their business and 
will use force to  discourage interventions if inspectors and 
legislators get too nosy.
     







      Brimstone Thug   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 worked as a member of the Brimstones to ensure the proliferation of the
 cattle barons’ rule of frontier Evangless. In return, you can get 
non-market worthy beef for free from any cattle baron you’ve worked for.
     







      Small Government, Big Gun   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You
 won’t stand for city folk nosing in on the Brimstones. While on the 
land of a western Evanglessian cattle baron, you have a +2 to resisting 
intimidations by non-military government officials.
     











      p The Carnival M
     



      Synonymous
 with insanity and anarchy, the Carnival is a nation-wide underground 
organization filled with the allegedly mentally infirm. Though they seem
 insane (and claim to be nothing but), stories and rumors abound about 
the Carnival’s efforts against unjust rulers and useless royalty. Under 
the guidance of Varas Dyrashi, their charismatic front-man, the Carnival
 is the greatest fear of corrupt government officials regardless of 
their sphere of influence. Around them stand the public faces no one 
suspects - the butcher, the haberdasher, the midwife. Members of the 
Carnival can be found everywhere and from every walk of life, if one 
knows where to look.
     



      Always
 appearing disorganized in the general public, they made a scene during 
the Evanglessian Civil War when they captured a near complete fleet of 
airships and routed a Crimson Marshal’s forces. Rather than siding with 
the royalists, the Carnival took their newfound fleet and put it to use 
terrorizing the local aristocracy who suffered from rumors of 
overtaxation and a lack of upkeep for their citizenry. Many leader still
 cave at the sound of the Carnival’s bombastic anthem before a single 
hostile action is taken. Often the fleet will disappear just as rapidly 
as it arrived, returning to hangars unknown.
     



      Insane
 or just unpredictable? The average Evanglessian remains still 
uncertain, the Carnival intent on keeping the status quo. Regardless of 
spontaneity, the Carnival can always be counted on to show where there 
is social unrest, either as instigators or arbiters.
     







      Carnie   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 joined up with the Carnival to fight against corrupt leaders to build a
 better Evangless. If you can get into contact with a Carnival airship, 
you can hitch a ride without issue, although the ship’s captain still 
determines the ship’s path.
     







      Carnival Performer   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You
 are a member of a Carnival sleeper cell. Whether working alone or with 
others, you act indistinguishably from the average citizen on matters of
 politics until it comes time to stop active tyranny. Constantly 
searching for abuses of power, you can instantly spot other Carnival 
members just by speaking with them for a few brief seconds.
     







      p Coaldust Unions M
     



      Colloquially
 known as the Coaldusters, the Coaldust Unions were conceived to protect
 the rights of laborers employed in the mines and refineries of 
Evangless. Stationed originally in the heavy strip-mining areas of the 
mountains around Varsylis, the Unions have spread across Evangless to 
encompass all industries, from coal to railways to textiles and 
everything in between.
     



      The
 Unions at one time used strikes, minor sabotage and blackmail to draw 
attention to their cause, working against big businesses who ran the 
mines. The corporations they rallied against made use of the LaVrey 
National Detective Agency to put a stop to the labor disputes whenever 
they grew out of hand. This forced the Coaldusters to find another 
method of working towards their goal.
     



      Another
 nonprofit, the Sons of Strife helped ensure the Coaldust Unions’ 
success by contributing funds and time. As a result of these 
cooperations many Sons are also Union members, helping find the youth in
 the Sons to find employment through the Coaldust Unions’ many labor 
networks.
     



      Today
 the Union has improved workers lives significantly, in many cases 
cutting work-related casualties and incidents by as much as fifty 
percent. Like all large bodies, though, corruption has taken hold. It is
 not unheard of for some local union leaders to withhold wages or not 
pass them out correctly, sometimes forcing laborers to work unpaid. 
These events are few and far between, and no one can doubt the good the 
Union has wrought in the large part.
     







      Coaldust Laborer   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      A
 unionized member of the workforce, you’ve joined one of the Coaldust 
Unions. Never shall you or your friends work in hazardous conditions. 
You have a +4 to Notice when trying to tell if a place of work is unfit 
for workers, although you may not be able to tell why.
     







      Coaldust Protestor   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 picketed against big business taking advantage of the powerless 
wage-slave. When you fight against mistreatment of workers, you’ll 
always find any employees that share your views.
     







      p Fulbourne Society M
     



      Old
 wood chairs, tobacco-stained tables laden with finger-foods, and a 
snifter of cognac are the trappings that surround the Fulbourne Society.
 Founded long ago as a simple aristocratic fraternity, these gentlemen 
have since become the premier experts in social maneuvering. Using their
 resources, they can find out anything about anyone, provided they care 
enough to try.
     



      Steeped
 in ritual and procedure, the Fulbourne reserve their membership for 
only the most exclusive of old families. They view the new money, the 
entrepreneurs, as interlopers beneath their proven nobility. They show 
their attitudes in holding members-only events where all arrive in 
opulent horse-drawn carriages heralding back to a time before their old 
money was all that old. The maxim, “You can’t join the Fulbourne society
 unless you’re born to it,” blankets everything they do despite being 
less than true. Every so often, new blood does manage to enter the 
ranks, but they are often “recently rediscovered old family material.”
     



      The
 Fulbourne Society is very resistant to change. They act as though the 
civil war never happened and stand staunchly behind the traditional role
 of the Emperor. Upstart movements such as the Brimstones and the Sons 
of Strife (and before them, the Militarists) infuriate them, leading the
 Society to act against them as often as possible.
     



      While
 stagnant and elitist, the Fulbourne Society has remained a part of the 
backdoor political scene in Evangless for many generations. And though 
their aid may be difficult to enlist, the information they provide is 
never wrong.
     







      Fulbourne Initiate   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      Invited
 for and forged through a series of unknown initiation rituals, you are a
 member of the Fulbourne Society. You have brothers and sisters in high 
places, granting you access to hidden Fulbourne lodges, most commonly 
found in the mansions of the long-lived rich.
     







      Fulbourne Scout   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You
 were trained to find new potential members for the Fulbourne Society. 
When reading tells on a target, a tier 2 result or higher will also tell
 you whether or not they’re old money.
     







      New Blood Fulbourne   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You
 somehow managed to worm your way into the Fulbourne Society despite 
having no lineage to speak of. No doubt you faked having noble lineage 
or tricked a Fulbourne scout with your silver tongue. The elite of the 
Society will keep extensive records on your dealings with them, which 
they courteously grant you unrestricted access to.
     







      p Highflyers M
     



      The
 founders of the Highflyers were once the elite aces of Evangless. 
Several still are, though as time progresses they spend less and less 
time in the cockpit. Still, many of these older men can outmanuever the 
best of the standing Evanglessian Air Fleet.
     



      During
 the civil war, these pilots were drawn together at a four-star bar in 
Aldamiir called the Silver Lining. These men eventually became known as 
the Highflyers, garnering members from the both armies, to the point 
where pilots for each side would paint the organization’s emblem on 
their fuselage and engage each other in honor duels if they spotted a 
rival in the opposing forces. Unfortunately this led to bad blood 
between members from opposing fleets. Most of it consists of swaggering 
talk of professional rivals, but the club still suffers sometimes lethal
 scrapes between members. Sanctioned duels held in secret are 
commonplace among the younger members, though death is thankfully rare 
during such events.
     



      The
 Highflyers welcome all pilots, from those who fly weighty airships to 
sleek ironbirds and everything in between. The nature of the club’s 
founding, though, inevitably leads the ironbird majority to look down on
 other pilots, given the recent prevalence of ironbird use within the 
military. Regardless, there’s no better place to go in Evangless for 
piloting tips from the best.
     







      Highflyer   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 earned enough commendations as a pilot to be invited into the luxury 
world of the Highflyers. You have the ability to requisition Highflyer 
badges and plates to prove your membership. Displaying them on your 
person or your vehicle will allow you to fly unrestricted through 
Evanglessian aerospace.
     







      Civil War Ace   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You
 were a Highflyer during the Evanglessian Civil War. Since former foes 
are now fellow Highflyers, you’re practiced in the art of nonlethal 
midair dueling. You can arrange Highflyer-sanctioned duels without the 
need of other Highflyers.
     







      Legendary Highflyer   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      Not
 even the Highflyers question your legendary piloting skills and your 
sheer power of presence. You have a VIP pass to the Silver Lining in 
Aldamiir, allowing you to skip any lines on the way in.
     







      LaVrey National
     



      p Detective Agency M
     



      Founded
 by Jordana LaVrey, the LaVrey National Detective Agency has become 
known as the foremost security force for hire in Evangless, as well as 
the largest. Primarily employed and stationed in western Evangless by 
the cattle barons and the railway companies, the LaVreys are composed of
 security personnel from all walks of life, incorporating mustered-out 
specialists from the Evanglessian army to mercenaries on contract work 
and more.
     



      From
 riding shotgun across an unfinished stretch of rail to guarding cargo 
through the worst of the lawless wilds, the LaVreys have earned a name 
for themselves as the best (and most) bang for your buck outside of the 
big city. Many bandits will outright abandon a job if signs of the 
LaVreys are about. Their reputation has earned as many enemies as it has
 potential business, however, and many times bandits will attack a 
LaVrey warded target simply to test their mettle against the LaVrey 
reputation.
     



      Jordana
 LaVrey herself is a woman in her early thirties who built her agency 
with her force of presence and self-established network of contacts 
stretching as far as the cities of eastern Evangless. She is a tall, 
strong-bodied woman striding through the tumult of battle wielding an 
enormous handheld gatling gun. Her continuous campaigning within the 
eastern part of the country has won the LaVreys several exclusive 
contracts with the government, including staffing guard positions for 
government cargo trains.
     



      Be
 it a private investigation, a rumor of corporate sabotage, or even an 
average citizen in need of a bodyguard, the LaVrey National Detective 
Agency meets all challenges with indomitable enthusiasm.
     







      LaVrey Agent   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 been hired by the LaVrey National Detective Agency. You will 
periodically receive notice of available jobs for you to take through 
the mail or via radio transceiver.
     







      LaVrey Detective   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 established yourself as a member of the LaVreys. You can flash your 
shiny membership badge to prove your combat prowess and reputation, 
although most people outside of eastern Evangless will have no idea who 
the LaVreys are.
     







      LaVrey Train Guard   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’re
 commonly hired to protect cargo trains as they cross Evangless. You can
 generally stop any Evanglessian cargo train you’re riding by showing 
your credentials to the train engineer.
     







      p Renovators M
     



      Founded
 by an inventor named Jed K. Sampson in the wake of the civil war’s 
destruction, the Renovators have become a respected institution across 
Evangless. With posts in every major city and smaller travel stations 
scattered about, they are everywhere one needs them to be.
     



      Jed
 believes that the many recent wars endured by Evangless have shattered 
Evangless’ precious landmarks and robbed the nation of key parts of its 
past. While many of those structures were old and outdated, it was 
better to have  them refurbished than to have lost them completely.
 The Renovators were conceived in order to rebuild the lost landmarks 
and adapt them to the current Evangless.
     



      The
 Renovators have a significant amount of resources. Some say their 
coffers fill from Jed’s own pockets, others from investors with personal
 stakes in the Renovator’s success. In truth, their wealth comes 
primarily from commissions from wealthy patrons with worn and torn 
edifices, as well as its members’ own pockets and other philanthropists.
 The Renovators consist of scientists, architects and inventors who 
contribute to the design process. They also contain untold numbers of 
laborers and security. They excel at finding out historical information 
and  figuring out how things work, thanks to a network of 
analytical engines.
     



      The
 Evanglessian government recognizes their architectural prowess, and as 
such most of the new cities built following the civil war were 
commissioned work of the Renovators. Despite this, they see Evangless as
 it once was and seek to restore her to her former beauty, aided by 
every willing and able set of hands who cares to join.
     







      Renovator   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 volunteered to join the reconstruction effort. Whatever your talent, 
you’ve taken it upon yourself to restore Evangless to her historic 
majesty. You have free access to pictographs of Evanglessian landmarks 
and buildings, when and where they exist.
     







      Renovator Foreman   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 led groups of Renovators to build or rebuild works of art, whether a 
simple building or an intricate sculpture or anything in between. When 
you have access to a Renovator analytical engine in-person or via radio 
it takes you no time at all to gather all historical records on 
available subjects.
     







      Renovator Designer   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 proven yourself as a planner, organizing Renovator efforts on various 
projects. You have easy access to Renovator laborers provided they are 
used for Renovator-sanctioned projects.
     







      p Sons of Strife M
     



      Founded
 by middle- and lower-class survivors of the Hurricane Wars and the 
Evanglessian Civil War, the Sons of Strife are the people who were 
forced to rebuild after decades at war. While many are actual sons and 
daughters of war veterans, the organization has branched out and 
enveloped all people coping and adjusting to the wartorn Evangless. Just
 as their parents, siblings, and friends fought for their lives, now the
 Sons of Strife fight for change.
     



      The
 leaders of the Sons believe the dysfunctional interplay of the military
 and aristocracy of Evangless caused its civil war. Their goal is a 
complete restructuring of society, where people make decisions for the 
sake of people, as opposed to the Emperor or his Crimson Marshals 
deciding on their behalf. This view, while radical, is shared by most 
Sons, although the more conservative members are fine with the Emperor’s
 power, as long as a parliament can be founded as a regulatory agency.
     



      The
 Sons began moving politically, calling for a reconstruction and 
evaluation of the monarchy and the legislative process. Their cries for a
 regulatory parliament soon began to echo among the less wealthy and 
rural citizenry, and the movement overtook numerous regions, especially 
those once occupied by Evanglessian Militarists. During this time, the 
Sons of Strife cooperated extensively with similar social movements, 
most notably the Coaldust Union.
     



      Believers
 in the notion of fair rule, the Sons of Strife aim for nothing less 
than a social revolution. Their movement is rapidly building steam, 
though against the implacable weight of Evangless’s long standing 
military heritage their goals are far from achieved.
     







      Son of Strife   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 joined the Sons of Strife in their push for regulation in government. 
Your political affiliation will find you friends amongst Militarists, 
Coaldust Union members, and fellow Sons.
     







      Born a Son   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You
 were a member of one of the many widowed families who helped build the 
Sons of Strife. Whether you agree with them or not, your thoughts on 
Evangless’ government interest many political journalists looking for a 
good quote for a filler article.
     







      Charitable Daughter   a
     







      Membership Story
     



      You
 are one of the beloved Daughters of Strife, who work to bring 
prosperity back to the lower class throughout Tephra. The charitable 
daughters of strife are well respected and loved and will find allies in
 the lowest of areas.
     







      Background Stories
     



      Background
 stories can normally only be chosen at character creation. On occasion,
 a background story might appear later, if, by chance, the game takes a 
long break and the character goes off and spends several years 
bartending. When he returned to active adventuring again, he might have 
gained a new background story. Otherwise, characters will choose or be 
given background stories at character creation.
     



      We
 normally recommend that you select one background story, but you or 
your narrator might allow you to take more if you’d like. If you don’t 
find any background stories to your liking, feel free to skip them, or -
 if you’re feeling quite adventurous - make your own!
     







      Airborne   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Whether
 it be standing on the wing of a flyer, using levitating gadgets, or 
wearing armor augmented with the ability to fly, you’ve trained yourself
 to fight unhindered in the air.
     







      Bartender   a
     







      Background Story
     



      With bartending on your resume and the right ingredients at your disposal, you know how to mix any beverage a bar patron orders.
     







      Burglar   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Life
 as a thief has taught you how to spot valuables on a target. When using
 your Cunning, you automatically score one tier higher to determine what
 a target has in their inventory.
     







      Cattle Wrangler   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Thanks to your experience with a lasso, when attempting to grab an animal with a whip you gain a +1 on your accuracy roll.
     







      Chef   a
     







      Background Story
     



      From
 a simple baker to the king’s personal soup cook, you’ve had some 
experience as a chef. Whenever you roll your Sciences to determine the 
quality of your cooking, roll twice and take the higher result.
     







      Clergy   a
     



      Background Story
     



      Requires: Faith Membership Story
     



      Thanks
 to your experience giving sermons from behind a pulpit, people of your 
faith trust you. When attempting to persuade someone of your faith to do
 something, you automatically score a tier higher.
     







      Conductor   a
     







      Background Story
     



      As
 a former train conductor, you’re used to the layout of different train 
models. You instantly know the functions and layouts of any civilian 
train car.
     







      Cowboy   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Long
 stretches of time spent on cattle drives has taught you how to keep 
watch over the herd while still resting at camp. When using Cunning to 
scout for enemies during any breather, roll twice and take the higher 
result.
     







      Cutpurse   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Your
 work as a pickpocket has taught you sleight of hand. You can hand items
 or take items from a target stealthily and without leaving yourself 
open to reflexes.
     







      Forgery Artist   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Due
 to previous illicit experiences, you can create or duplicate legal and 
commercial documents such as proof of identification, train tickets, or 
the necessary paperwork to enter or exit a country.
     







      Forest Gatherer   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Thanks
 to experience in surviving in the wild, when you’re out in the 
wilderness, you never worry about finding food. You’ve learned where to 
find all the nourishment you need!
     







      Gambler   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Your
 habit of gambling has made your money a bit of a swaying game. You can 
gamble away up to 10 princes, double-or-nothing, during every period of 
downtime. Call odds or evens and then roll your die - if you called it, 
you get double what you wagered. If you failed, you lose it all and you 
can’t try again until your next downtime.
     







      Gentry   a
     



      Background Story
     



      Your
 leisurely life out in the country has taught you how to effectively run
 a farm-based estate. All employees of your estate receive a +1 on Brute
 rolls.
     



      Handy Craftsman   a
     







      Background Story
     



      You
 have worked as a crafter who made common items sold in general stores 
around the world. You can make all of the equipment listed under 
“Adventuring Basics” during any period of downtime.
     







      Kinematician   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Your
 knowledge of the laws of physics and magnetism give you insight on 
ranged weaponry. You can determine the range of a weapon via a Cunning 
roll.
     







      Lawman   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Your
 time protecting the peace has given you a sixth sense for lawbreaking. 
You gain a +2 on all Cunning rolls to catch lawbreakers in the act.
     







      Librarian   a
     







      Background Story
     



      You’re
 an old hat with books, their organization, and finding just the right 
piece of information when you need it. When attempting to research a 
piece of information, it takes you half the amount of time it would take
 anybody else. Your narrator will still set that amount of time.
     







      Lumberjack   a
     







      Background Story
     



      You
 were once or still are a lumberjack of great skill who felled many 
trees. Because of this you can predict where a falling tree will land 
with great accuracy.
     







      Mariner   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Your many years at sea have taught you the necessary skills to be able to tell what aquatic life is usually nearby.
     







      MoneyLender   a
     







      Background Story
     



      At
 one point in your life you found that the lending of money in varying 
amounts to people with interest can be profitable but requires an 
extremely keen memory. Because of this you can nearly always remember 
the names and locations of people you have met and have the credibility 
to lend money with predetermined interest.
     











      Mysterious Twin   a
     







      Background Story
     



      By
 some cosmic coincidence, you have the exact same skills and specialties
 as a member of the party who just died. Taking this story gives you all
 their experience and any rewarded stories they had earned.
     







      Nobility   a
     







      Background Story
     



      You
 were born and raised in a house of both prestige and wealth that is 
known throughout the land. You wear a signet ring that makes you 
recognizable by most other social elites and their guards and thus 
welcome in their homes.
     







      Physician   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Because
 of your time working as a physician, you have skill at diagnosing a 
variety of ailments. When rolling Cunning to determine what ails a 
target, roll twice and take the higher result.
     







      Railway Worker   a
     







      Background Story
     



      Your work as a union railway worker allows you to ride on any passenger train for free.
     







      Repairman   a
     







      Background Story
     



      You
 have experience repairing weapons, armor, and assorted gadgetry. You 
can repair broken items anytime outside of battle, even if you don’t 
know how to make them yourself.
     







      Rodeo Rider   a
     







      Background Story
     



      You get a +4 to Dexterity when attempting to hold onto your mount whenever something attempts to knock you off of it.
     







      Tailemy
     



      In
 the holy city of Galantria stands the original Church of Tailemy, where
 Saint Nerimsal carved the holy doctrine and cosmogony of Tailemy on 
every free wall in the building. Saint Nerimsal wrote of the death of 
the Beloved Mother, who sacrificed herself to Aeon - goddess of the moon
 and the underworld - to birth the world. Scribes collected Saint 
Nerimsal’s carvings into a single book, known as the Aktailem, which 
serves as the religious text for all of Tailemy.
     



      The
 tale of the Beloved Mother’s sacrifice spread across central Rilausia 
and became the dominant religion in parts of the Haudi Empire and 
Tharmuris for many years. When Velkya established Evangless (which 
translates to “Gates of Heaven” in old Haud), she did so with Tailemy as
 the recognized church of the state. Since the Loveless Wars, Tailemy 
has become the dominant religion in not only Evangless, but in almost 
every location that Jinzium hasn’t claimed.
     



      The
 Triune heads the church in Galantria. The church is composed of three 
maidens, each of whom take on a different title: the Paladin, the 
Crusader, and the Martyr. The Paladin (and her followers) protect the 
church from heretics and those proposing evil. The paladins tout that 
Aeon will again destroy the world and all members of Tailemy must be 
ready for it. The crusaders take that to the next level, pushing against
 heretics and converting any they can. Finally, the martyrs are the 
clergy who stay within the church, sacrificing their lives to helping 
those in need. The vast majority of the Tailemite clergy fall within the
 martyr sect, following the Beloved Mother’s footsteps.
     



      The
 clergy are recognizable for their whites gowns and red accents (the 
blood of their Beloved Mother). The doctrine of the church calls for all
 people to rally together, for only can the combined power of all 
Tephrans fight against the world’s coming apocalypse. It is believed 
that Aeon hopes to find a foothold in the world among the wicked and 
sinful. The more people that can be brought under the purview of Tailemy
 the better a chance humanity has to be saved.
     



      Tailemy
 embraces change unlike any other known religion. It often sees Jinzium 
as a tribal, pagan religion. Meanwhile, Tailemy is known for embracing 
new technologies and new ways of thinking. Animals that undergo 
metamorphoses are exalted by the religion, and the moth has become 
Tailemy’s symbol (often accompanied by a snake, who represents Aeon).
     







      Crusader of Tailemy   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      You
 are fighting to unite the world against its future perils. You are a 
crusader of Tailemy, never wanting the Beloved Mother’s death to be in 
vain. You strive forward into the world, spreading the good word of 
Tailemy, the Aktailem, and striking down sin at its heart. You will 
always find companionship with your fellow crusaders, and you gain a +1 
on strike rolls against any who have announced their heresy against the 
Beloved Mother.
     







      Devout of Tailemy   a
     







      Personality Story
     



      You
 are truly embroiled with the doctrine and beliefs of Tailemy. Your 
belief in yourself is greatened through your belief in the Beloved 
Mother. Any week in which you’ve attended a sermon given by a clergyman 
of Tailemy, you gain a +1 on all spirit rolls.
     







      Martyr of Tailemy   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      You
 have joined the clergy of Tailemy, sacrificing your well-being and 
livelihood to ensure that everyone else may live their lives. Any fellow
 believer in Tailemy will likely treat you well if they recognize you 
for who you are.
     







      Ordained by Tailemy   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      Requires: Any other Tailemite membership story
     



      You
 have gained a good standing in the Tailemite church, and you are given 
the privilege of speaking publically about Tailemy and performing 
religious rites. You are ordained within the church, and may represent 
the Church of Tailemy in any of its religious rites.
     







      Paladin of Tailemy   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      You
 have become a paladin of Tailemy, swearing your service to the 
protection of the church. Wherever you go, you will protect the faithful
 and help buffer the world against its forthcoming doom. You have a 
strong belief in humanity and Tephra, the final bastion against Aeon. 
You gain a +1 on your soak class when defending another member of the 
Tailemite faith.
     







      Raised by the Church   a
     







      Background Story
     



      You
 were raised by the Tailemite church, either as an orphan or because 
your parents were residents of their church. Regardless of whether you 
still believe in the religious doctrine, you are intimately familiar 
with the layout of the church and will probably know the right names to 
drop to get your way in any church. You gain a +2 on Cunning rolls when 
attempting to get something from a Tailemite church.
     







      Free Will
     



      The
 concept of free will is an idea embraced by many Tephrans, though to 
the faithful of Free Will, the concept is much more all-encompassing and
 significant. Established by the Haudi Empress Zoleesha IV, Free Will 
has become the leading religion of the Haudi people, since their 
estrangement from Jinzium, though it has spread far and wide beyond the 
Empire to all corners of Rilausia.
     



      Free
 Will is tended to locally by Teachers, who are often professors or 
academics in a recognized field. Savants govern the activities of the 
religion regionally and act as the leaders of churches and temples. 
These sanctuaries are most often similar to libraries and lounges, where
 faithful and non-faithful alike can use the research resources offered 
or simply take a meal and discuss the day with fellow thinkers. They 
convene annually in month-long assemblies where they amend the works 
collected and dedicated to Free Will and discuss how Free Will has 
expanded in the last year. All faithful answer to the Hierophant, the 
popularly-elected leader of the faith chosen by Savants. The Hierophant 
is typically a member of the royal family and though their bloodline 
carries great weight, their academic prowess still comes first.
     



      Teachers
 and Savants have no standing uniform or recognizable state of attire 
save a tome they carry that holds the greatest works in the religion’s 
archives, which are used for the basis of discussions and debates. New 
interpretations of these works are regularly presented to the Savants by
 the Teachers. The tomes are often bound in red kid and have pages 
trimmed in gilt.
     



      Free
 Will has no holy tome or sacred days or even any special rites. It is a
 faith based upon scientific reasoning and learning in all its forms, 
exalting reasoning and knowledge. Its faithful are encouraged to 
question and test and to pursue the truth of the world in any manner 
they see fit. They take to life with the certainty of scientists, 
pursuing clarity and understanding of the world that surrounds them. In 
place of sermons, they attend lectures and round-table discussions about
 the community and the world at large, where they are encouraged to 
debate freely without fear of reprisal or censorship.
     



      With
 their open acceptance of science, the average member of Free Will views
 life as a series of academic challenges that test one’s own statistical
 rigor. If an acolyte is too weak to overcome their problems, they need 
more teaching and instruction, which has led to a somewhat universal 
view of the world as a great challenge that must be risen up to or 
surpassed. While not cruel, many faithful are extremely clinical, and 
this has been mistaken by some as ruthless or cold.
     







      Free Will Acolyte   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      You
 stand in the light of reason and science. The world holds no secrets 
from you that you will not discover in time. People who are mysterious 
or seek to hoard knowledge deserve only the worst kind of loathing. When
 interacting with the hidebound and dogmatic, you gain a +1 to Spirit 
rolls.
     







      Teacher of the Faith   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      Your
 contributions to the works of Free Will have gained you a reputation in
 the religion. You are treated courteously and with deference. You may 
lead services of the Free Will faith and receive a +2 to Cunning rolls 
for the days you do so.
     







      Free Will Savant   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      Requires “Teacher of the Faith” story and the publication of an intellectual work
     



      You
 are renowned within the faith as a person of standing and intellectual 
insight. You gain the benefits of the “Teacher of the Faith” story, and 
may represent Free Will in matters that pertain to your community and 
region.
     







      Jinzium
     



      Jinzium
 is by far the oldest religion in Rilausia, with its roots lying in the 
foundation of the Haudi Empire. It venerates the sun god Jinzi and his 
domain, the entirety of the skies. Its faithful believe that their souls
 become stars upon death, and that at some point, all will be reunited 
with the sun in harmony. As such, the faithful are often kind and caring
 and can’t stand to see others in pain. It suffered a decline after the 
Haud Empress Zoleesha IV changed the Empire’s national religion to Free 
Will, but has seen a resurgence in the last century since the Jinzium 
Revival of 735.
     



      Jinzium
 has spread like wildfire since its revival. The Eternal Church is 
watched over by the Elf Who Writes in Fire, Igi, who holds Jinzium’s 
highest office, the Guiding Paradigm. Igi is an older elf who leads the 
faith (though not without occasional problems), and is considered to be 
the hand of Jinzi.
     



      Jinzium’s
 long life has seen many separations from the church proper and has 
resulted in many separate views of Jinzi and his nature. The eldest 
branch of the church, the Eternal Church, adheres to the original tenets
 prior to the faith’s eviction from the Haudi Empire. Sometimes referred
 to as Orthodox Jinzium, it is quartered within the High Rilausian 
Forest and is watched over by Igi himself, who is still revered by most 
of the factions of Jinzium and provides guidance to all of them, 
regardless of stance.
     



      The
 Revivalists, a faction centered in Dalvozzea and led by the Nine Wings 
of Divinity, often clashes with the Eternal Church. The Revivalists are 
spiteful toward Igi, claiming that an elf is not a fit ruler for 
Jinzium. It has long been believed that Jinzi orchestrates events 
through a choir of angels, and the winged farishtaas believe that they 
are those angels. The Revivalists are adapting the dogma and the 
scriptures to fit in with the new world, a world where farishtaas rule, 
and the Eternal Church has been resistant to that.
     



      Infernal
 Jinzium is the faction closest related to the Eternal Church, but their
 failure to update to modern views is the most pronounced. They view the
 winged farishtaas as abominations, perversions that Jinzi long ago 
removed and that science should not bring back. They are ruled by the 
Six Infernals, a council of bishop-like offices. Centuries ago, they 
were sent by the Guiding Paradigm to spread the word of Jinzium to the 
barbaric lands of Paldorus, but the Infernals, separated by distance, 
found their own path and strayed from the Eternal Church.
     



      Regardless
 of their alliegance, all factions of Jinzi revere the sacred kingdom of
 the sky. From the walls and gates of the clouds where angels and fey 
stride across the battlements to the blue sky where the faithful join 
Jinzi in his court, to the night sky where Jinzi’s daughter Aeon dwells 
and holds the souls of the impure in captivity until they have proven 
themselves and may be released to the blue.
     



      Though
 it has seen many separations, Jinzium still holds a strong place in the
 hearts of Rilausia. Jinzium is commonly found in almost every nation 
except Evangless, where Tailemy holds sway. Though Tailemy is the state 
religion in Evangless, many people still follow and practice Jinzium, as
 the nations Evangless conquered were Scions of the Sun. Though few 
Jinzium churches stand openly in Evanglessian cities, followers are 
still easily found.
     







      Scion of the Sun   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      You
 follow the path of Jinzium and delight in the presence of the sun. On 
days where it is particularly bright and blue outside you feel happy and
 ready to get things done, granting you a +2 to Spirit rolls to stay 
focused.
     







      Archon   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      You
 have great standing within the church of Jinzium. You may lead services
 and speak for the local church community. If in need, churches and 
congregations will grant you aid and shelter.
     







      Soul of Sol   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      Requires: Archon story
     



      You
 have embraced Jinzium with every fiber of your being. You spread the 
word wherever you travel, regardless of how darkly it is received, and 
through this your work has been noticed by the church. You are 
recognized as a person of great worth and may speak for the church in 
pressing times.
     







      Orthodox Jinzist   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      You
 ascribe to the purest form of Jinzium, the Eternal Church. Listening to
 the words of Igi, The Elf Who Writes In Fire, fills you with pride in 
your faith. No matter how much doubt about your faith you have, 
listening to a sermon by Igi, even if it’s over the radio, will 
completely reassure you of your beliefs.
     







      Starborn Tradionalist   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      You’ve
 placed your faith in the immemorial rituals of the Six Infernals. While
 some other followers of Jinzium may call you old-fashioned, your 
timeless prayers and holy symbols never fail to intrigue agnostic folks.
     







      Angel Fever   a
     







      Faith Membership Story
     



      You
 are a member of the Revivalist sect of Jinzium, ignoring the Guiding 
Paradigm to place your attention on the angelic winged farishtaa. 
Whenever you’re in the presence of such a divine creature, you’ll never 
feel fatigue.
     
























      Chapter 5: Gear
     







      Materials
     



      Every
 item you have will be composed of something, oftentimes metal, wood, or
 fabric. Materials will be most important for your weapons and armor, 
and you will need to decide what an item is made of when you select that
 item.
     



      Metal
     



      Weapons
 and armor made of metal are the modus operandi. Metal items are 
magnetic and they can get hot, but they’re not likely to catch on fire. 
Metal weapons also have the most variety in things that they can do, so 
you’ll be able to upgrade them a lot with augments.
     



      Organic
     



      Organic
 items will often be made up of bone, though sometimes they’ll also 
consist of animal hides or scales. Organic items are very difficult to 
work with, and will always have 2 less slots for augments than their 
metal counterparts.
     



      Textile
     



      Textiles
 include basic fabrics and, more commonly, leathers. Generally, the only
 thing you can make using textiles are light armor, cloaks, and whips. 
Textile items have 1 less slot than metal items to hold augments and 
will burn away easily, if lit on fire.
     



      Wood
     



      Wood
 weapons and items are pretty common, and often your polearms and 
shields will include wood, though it may not be the primary material. 
Wood will give you 1 less slot on items to use for augments. Wood is 
also more likely to burn than other items.
     



      Materials Available for Weapons
     



      Melee & Throwing Weapons        Any
     



      Firearms        Metal, Wood
     



      Bows        Metal, Organic, Wood
     



      Crossbows        Metal, Organic, Wood
     







      The Trust
     



      The
 wealth of the nations is centered around a super-national bank known as
 the Trust. Hundreds of years old and charged with the creation of 
money, the regulating of international trade and tariffs, and 
supervising inflation rates inside of each nation, the Trust has long 
been one of the most powerful, most prestigious organizations in the 
world.
     



      Your Local Trust Branch
     



      A
 town is not a town until it has two things: a Trust branch and a post 
office. The Trust has several services that are widely used and widely 
believed in. Foremost, the Trust acts as any bank, safeguarding people’s
 money. It can also be used as storage, for a person who has an account 
with the Trust will have their information kept on file within the 
Trust. A person can go to any Trust branch and access their account. 
Trusts will also have safeboxes, but the contents are (for obvious 
reasons) only accessible at the branch that holds them.
     



      Trusts
 rarely have accounts that gain interest and they rarely give out credit
 to individuals. On occasion, a Trust branch will offer a special 
account that will change based on inflation, but, more often than not, 
this is a faulty deal.
     



      The
 people who work at a Trust branch are members of the Trust, but they 
can also act independently. As such, many people who work at Trust 
branches are also moneylenders. Though the Trust does not give loans, 
the people who work within the Trust likely will.
     



      Currency
     



      The
 Trust produces and regulates the amount of currency in circulation. The
 Trust uses an old measurement of currency  known as the “Royalty 
System.” The currency uses three coins: the duke, prince, and king. Most
 of the lower class deals almost exclusively with dukes, while the 
mercantile class deals with princes. The rather valuable king is rarely 
seen and only the quite wealthy will use them on a regular basis.
     



      The
 Duke: The duke is a unique coin, an oblong-shaped coin with a hollow 
square center. The coin is mostly black with white veins through it, 
like dark marble or obsidian. The most unique feature of the duke is its
 ability to be split into 8 pieces and then reconnected. The duke is 
actually 8 small magnetic pieces that fit together to make one coin. 
They’re difficult to split apart by accident, but the duke can be turned
 into a half duke, quarter duke, or eighth duke, as needed.
     



      The
 Prince: The prince was once a white and silver coin with a shape 
similar to the duke but a little bit larger. However, the prince has 
been converted almost entirely into bills. A prince is a rectangular 
bill, mostly white with some silver and green strands running through 
it.
     



      The
 King: The king remains in its oldest form as a gold, thick, circular 
coin with black veins running through it. When kings are made into 
bills, they are made of a thick parchment and have the same coloration 
as the coins.
     



      Almost
 all one-serving goods will be a quarter-duke - a mug of ale, a couple 
vegetables, some meat, etc. A good sword will be around 5 princes (equal
 to 50 dukes, or 200 mugs of ale). In a day’s work, the average person 
will make between a duke and three dukes.
     



      History & Culture
     



      The
 Trust is watched over by Caxan (kay-zen). Named after its founder, the 
title of Caxan has been held by many people over the history of the 
Trust. Chosen by an elite council, Caxan is the embodiment of the 
Trust’s core tenets of balance and fair trade and serves as the arbiter 
of equilibrium. Whenever a Caxan passes away, the time comes to select a
 new Caxan. Many apply but only one is judged to truly incarnate the 
values set forth by the founder. Though this is certainly not the case, 
Caxan is often depicted as a muscular, six-armed man.
     



      The
 Trust is akin to an enormous governing body, and it has membership 
worldwide. There are two types of membership - trustees and those who 
follow Caxan. Anybody can be a trustee. Being a trustee simply means 
that you follow the economic standards put forward by the Trust, 
something that often helps businesses thrive in the capitalist societies
 around the globe. Being a follower of Caxan is almost like a cult: you 
are a balancer, traveling worldwide to ensure that the economic balance 
is maintained and that trade remains fair.  Caxan, his employees, 
and his followers are regulators, ensuring every economic exchange is 
fair and just. While your average Tephran may never see a member of the 
Trust doing their job, you can be assured they are working behind the 
scenes to keep the Rilausian economy running smoothly. As such, members 
of the Trust are held in high regard wherever they go. The Trust is not 
tied to any country or land, and therefore takes no part in the 
collection of taxes. In addition, should a government try to manipulate 
or cheat them, the Trust will drop all financial support and ban them 
from Trust services. While this may seem harsh, the Trust views this as a
 just reward for actions taken against them.
     







      Melee Weaponry
     



      Melee
 attacks are those that target adjacent foes. When making a melee 
attack, you can either be using a close melee weapon, be fighting 
unarmed, or using a polearm or flexible weapon (like a chain or whip). 
There is a wide variety of melee weapons available to you, and they have
 the highest damage potential.
     







      Unarmed
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Damage Class: 2
     



      Target: Adjacent Foe
     



      An
 unarmed attack is any attack that does not use a weapon. Instead, 
unarmed attacks can be anything from your fists to your elbows to your 
legs and knees. Unarmed attacks are the fastest possible attacks at 1 
action point apiece, but they do significantly less damage than attacks 
with weapons.
     



      Unarmed
 attacks utilize no equipment and thus cannot be upgraded by an 
armsmith.
     







      Weapons Sizes
     



      There are four sizes of weapons: light, medium, heavy, and (the more rare) super-heavy. This is how to define each one.
     



      Weapon Size        How to Define
     



      Light        small enough to fit in your pocket
     



      Medium        too large to fit in your pocket, but you’ll only need one hand to use it
     



      Heavy        so
 large that you’ll need two hands to swing it (and there’s no chance of 
fitting it in your pocket)
     



      Super-Heavy        you
 need two hands to carry it, swing it, and you’ll need to get your 
footing right in order to use it
     















      Light Weapons
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 4
     



      Wielded With: One Hand
     



      Target: Adjacent Foe
     



      Light
 weapons are defined as any small, one-handed weapon that is easily 
concealable. All small items can count as light weapons. If you’re 
thinking about getting really good with light weapons, you might want to
 check out the Espionage skill, one of the Cunning skills.
     



      Medium Weapons
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 6
     



      Wielded With: One Hand
     



      Target: Adjacent Foe
     



      Medium
 weapons are one-handed weapons that are not easily concealable. Medium 
weapons are the bulk of one-handed weapons - pretty much anything that 
looks large enough to deal some real damage. If you want to get great 
with medium weapons, you should look at the Swashbuckling skill under 
Dexterity.
     



      Heavy Weapons
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 8
     



      Wielded With: Two Hands
     



      Target: Adjacent Foe
     



      A
 heavy weapon is loosely defined as any weapon that is used in two 
hands. A heavy weapon is virtually impossible to conceal on your person.
 If you want to master heavy weapons, you should look into the Overpower
 skill, located under the Brute attribute.
     



      Super-Heavy Weapons
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 10
     



      Wielded With: Two Hands
     



      Target: Adjacent Foe
     



      Super-heavy
 weapons are immense, building-destroying tools of destruction. 
Super-heavy weapons require two hands to wield and two hands to carry. 
These do a lot of damage but require the wielder to take up footing in 
order to swing them. Entering into footing stance requires 1 action 
point, and you cannot normally enter into another stance while you’re in
 footing.
     



      You
 may use a super-heavy weapon without taking footing, but doing so gives
 you a -3 on your accuracy and strike rolls, as if it were an impromptu 
weapon.
     



      Flexible        ability to grab, -1 damage class
     



      You
 can make any weapon into a non-rigid one, a weapon that has flexible 
parts like a whip, chain, or flail. Flexible weapons can be used to make
 a grab, just like a hand can. Because the weapon loses some of its 
impact power, its damage class is 1 lower.
     



      Polearm        +5 feet of reach, -1 damage class
     



      Medium
 and heavier weapons can be polearms. The longer handle allows polearms 
to attack any foe within 10 feet, but also makes the weapon more 
difficult to swing, decreasing its damage class by 1.
     



      Throwing        can be thrown, -1 damage class
     



      Throwing
 weapons can be anything from throwing knives to javelins to gigantic 
hurling spheres. Weapons designed to be thrown have 1 less damage class,
 but can hit people at a distance. Each thrown weapon has a different 
distance, depending on its size. For every 10 feet you throw a weapon 
beyond its distance, it takes a -1 on the accuracy roll. Weapons not 
designed to be thrown can go no farther than 25 feet.
     



      Light: 25 feet
     



      Medium: 75 feet
     



      Heavy: 50 feet
     



      Note: A thrown weapon is no longer a melee weapon for the purposes of determining how specialties work.
     







      Combination Weapons
     



      While
 you can make any melee weapon into a flexible weapon, a polearm, or a 
throwing weapon, you can also combine those aspects. Want to make a 
flexible polearm? Go for it! You’ll just have to apply the damage class 
penalty both times, but now you have a weapon that’ll hit people 10 feet
 away and you can make grabs.
     



      If
 you want to create a bolas, you can combine a throwing weapon with a 
flexible weapon. Now you can throw a weapon that can make grabs. Want to
 tie up an opponent? Throw a light bolas at their legs, making a grab, 
and you’ll nab them.
     







      Impromptu Weapons
     



      (-3 on Accuracy and Strike)
     



      Anything
 that is not designed to be used as a weapon is impromptu weaponry. 
Impromptu weaponry is assigned a weapon class by the narrator and has a 
-3 to accuracy and strike rolls. Once a weapon is assigned a weapon 
class, it cannot change weapon classes (unless it breaks in two!).
     



      For
 example, if some characters pick up their chairs, they are heavy melee 
weapons (because they’re using them two-handed), so they have a damage 
class of 8 and they take a -3 to their accuracy and strike rolls. If 
they later break off the chair legs, they can use them as impromptu 
light weapons, so they’d have a damage class of 4.
     







      Firearms
     



      Blasting
 people with double-barreled shotguns, unholstering your revolver in an 
instant and loading your target with lead, or scoping down your rifle’s 
sights and shooting a man at two hundreds yards away - it doesn’t matter
 who you’re trying to kill, firearms will do you right.
     



      Firearms
 come in several varieties, but they’ll be largely covered under four 
different categories: light, medium, heavy, and super-heavy. Each of 
those categories will have a basic damage class and range. Once you’ve 
chosen the size of your firearm, you will also choose your ammunition 
type. Most will choose the standard cartridge, the normal damaging 
round. Some might choose “shot” to turn their weapon into a shotgun and 
deal more damage up close. Others will use the sniper cartridge, a long 
range round with slightly lower damage, or the high damage jacketed 
rounds. Once you’ve chosen your choice of ammunition, you may change it 
for 1 action point, assuming you are carrying another ammunition type.
     



      Unlike
 other weapons, firearms use accuracy to determine your damage instead 
of your strike. You only roll once for firearms - your accuracy will 
determine if you hit, and then you will tier the result to get damage. 
As you can imagine, accuracy is twice as important for a gunslinger as 
most others.
     



      Firearms
 have to be readied between every shot. This can represent rechambering,
 reloading, or cocking the hammer of the firearm. When combat begins, 
you can often assume that the firearm is readied, but after firing, you 
must ready it again.
     







      Light Firearms
     



      Cost to Fire: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 2
     



      Wielded With: One Hand
     



      Readying: 0 AP
     



      Target: Any foe within 50 feet. For every 10 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Light
 firearms are peashooters, normally the type that could fit in your palm
 or in your pocket, and a gun that somebody searching you would often 
entirely overlook. On the flipside, though, they deal very minimal 
damage and are more likely to be an irritant than a killer.
     



      Medium Firearms
     



      Cost to Fire: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 4
     



      Wielded With: One Hand
     



      Readying: 1 AP if you’re using one hand, or 0 AP if you’re using two hands
     



      Target: Any foe within 100 feet. For every 25 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Medium
 firearms are all of your revolvers, sawed-off shotguns, and small 
rifles. These guns are handguns - they can be held in one hand, though 
many will use two hands to help cock the hammer, rechamber the bullet, 
and lend support to absorb the recoil of the firearm. Note that 
reloading them normally requires 1 action point, but if you dedicate a 
second hand to the gun, it costs 0 action points to reload.
     







      Heavy Firearms
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 6
     



      Wielded With: Two Hands
     



      Readying: 1 AP
     



      Target: Any foe within 200 feet. For every 50 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Heavy
 firearms are your rifles and shotguns - your two-handed long rifles. 
They have a pretty good range, but require 2 hands to use and 
rechambering costs 1 action point.
     



      Super-Heavy Firearms
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 8
     



      Wielded With: Two Hands
     



      Readying: 2 AP
     



      Target: Any foe within 300 feet. For every 100 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Super-heavy
 firearms are very large guns, meant to take down everything from 
elephants to raging, steam-powered automatons. These do a lot of damage,
 but require the wielder to take up footing in order to fire them. 
Entering into footing stance requires 1 action point, and you cannot 
normally enter into another stance while you’re in footing.
     



      You
 may use a super-heavy firearm without taking footing, but doing so 
gives you a -3 on your accuracy roll, as if it were an impromptu weapon.
     







      Double-Barreled
     



      Firearms
 can be made double-barreled for no additional cost. By making a weapon 
into a double-barreled firearm, you can fire it twice before having to 
ready it. However, reloading the double-barreled firearm takes 1 more 
action point per round loaded.
     







      Firearm Ammunitions
     



      Firearms
 can use a wide range of ammunitions, and each type of ammunition is 
going to give you some different bonuses and penalties. You may change 
your firearms ammunition for 1 action point.
     



      Cartridge
     



      The
 cartridge is the most common type of ammunition used. Normally a 
cartridge is a bullet packaged with the gunpowder and primer to most 
easily blast holes in nearby villains. The cartridge uses the basic 
statistics for the firearm.
     



      Blank
     



      Blanks
 are cartridges that do not fire anything - they produce all of the 
effects of having fired the firearm, but do not blast forward any 
projectile. Somebody using blanks is going to have an easier time 
clubbing somebody to death with their firearm than they will shooting 
them with it.
     



      High Damage Cartridge
     



      High
 damage cartridges, often jacketed or armor-piercing rounds or solid 
shot, increase the damage class by 2 but also increase the readying time
 by 1 action point. High damage cartridges are very powerful and deadly,
 but much more difficult to use.
     



      Shot
     



      Shot,
 commonly known as lead shot or buckshot, is composed of numerous small 
projectiles that are all shot out of the firearm at the same time. At a 
distance, shot has a higher likelihood of hitting. However, the further 
the shot is from the firearm, the less penetrating power it has. Rather 
than losing accuracy at a range, shot decreases its damage class by 1 
for every range increment past the basic distance.
     



      Sniper Cartridge
     



      Sniper
 cartridges are specifically designed to go far and go fast. A sniper 
cartridge only loses 1 accuracy for every 2 range increments it travels.
 However, sniper shots have 1 less damage class than normal.
     







      Bows
     



      Bows
 are difficult weapons to use, requiring great amounts of training and 
skill. For those who master them, however, they can easily rival 
firearms and deal a great amount of damage. As per normal, bows use 
accuracy to determine if they hit and strike to determine how much 
damage they deal. Though you can get a bow of any size, they always 
require two hands to use.
     







      Light Bows
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 3
     



      Wielded With: Two Hands
     



      Target: Any foe within 25 feet. For every 10 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Light
 bows are most commonly slightshots, though very small bows do exist. 
They don’t deal much damage, but are faster than their larger 
counterparts.
     







      Medium Bows
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 5
     



      Wielded With: Two Hands
     



      Target: Any foe within 50 feet. For every 10 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Medium bows are between 2 and 4 feet tall, have decent pull, and can deal fair amounts of damage.
     







      Heavy Bows
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      Damage Class: 7
     



      Wielded With: Two Hands
     



      Target: Any foe within 75 feet. For every 25 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Heavy bows are typically about 4-5 feet tall. They have a decent range, and deal some pretty solid damage when they strike.
     







      Super-Heavy Bows
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      Damage Class: 9 (wielded as a heavy weapon)
     



      Wielded With: Two Hands
     



      Target: Any foe within 200 feet. For every 75 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Super-heavy
 bows are designed to hit opponents at a great distance and their long 
arrows can deal excruciating amounts of damage. Super-heavy bows require
 the wielder to take up footing in order to fire them. Entering into 
footing stance requires 1 action point, and you cannot normally enter 
into another stance while you’re in footing.
     



      You
 may use a super-heavy bow without taking footing, but doing so gives 
you a -3 on your accuracy roll, as if it were an impromptu weapon.
     







      Crossbows
     



      Crossbows
 are weapons that in many ways are similar to firearms, but they are 
more difficult to load and can deal more damage. Bows and crossbows use 
the same types of ammunitions, listed below under “Arrows & Bolts.”
     



      Crossbows
 use accuracy to determine your damage instead of your strike. You only 
roll once for crossbows - your accuracy will determine if you hit, and 
then you will tier the result to get damage.
     







      Light Crossbows
     



      Cost to Fire: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 3
     



      Wielded With: One Hand
     



      Readying: 1 AP
     



      Target: Any foe within 25 feet. For every 10 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Light
 crossbows are often small, concealable crossbows that shoot a small 
metal spike or dart. Many people will attach them to their wrists.
     







      Medium Crossbows
     



      Cost to Fire: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 5
     



      Wielded With: One Hand
     



      Readying: 1 AP
     



      Target: Any foe within 50 feet. For every 10 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Medium crossbows are often called pistol crossbows, as they can be held with one hand and fired like a pistol.
     







      Heavy Crossbows
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 7
     



      Wielded With: Two Hands
     



      Readying: 2 AP
     



      Target: Any foe within 100 feet. For every 25 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Heavy crossbows require two hands to use and are difficult to conceal. They’re good at a range, but have a hefty reload time.
     







      Super-Heavy Crossbows
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Damage Class: 9
     



      Wielded With: Two Hands
     



      Readying: 3 AP
     



      Target: Any foe within 150 feet. For every 50 feet beyond that the target stands, the shot takes a -1 on the accuracy roll.
     



      Super-heavy
 crossbows are almost ballistas - they do a great deal of damage but are
 very difficult to use in the heat of battle. These do a lot of damage, 
but require the wielder to take up footing in order to fire them. 
Entering into footing stance requires 1 action point, and you cannot 
normally enter into another stance while you’re in footing.
     



      You
 may use a super-heavy bow without taking footing, but doing so gives 
you a -3 on your accuracy roll, as if it were an impromptu weapon.
     







      Arrows & Bolts
     



      Bows
 and crossbows shoot arrows and bolts, respectively. There are numerous 
ways to craft arrows and bolts, though they are often made of wood with a
 stone or metal tip. You may change your choice of crossbow bolt for 1 
action point, but changing your choice of arrow costs nothing.
     







      Standard
     



      Most
 crossbows and bows will use the standard arrows and bolts. These can 
refer to broadhead arrows or some other normal version.
     



      Bladed
     



      Bladed
 bolts and arrows have barbs near the tip that cause bleeding from the 
target, though they fly less true. Using a bladed bolt or arrow gives a 
-2 on the accuracy roll, but causes 1 point of bleeding per tier of 
damage dealt.
     



      Hooked
     



      These
 arrows and bolts are designed to stick in a target and not come out. 
Though they do no less damage, removing them requires 2 action points 
(whereas most arrows and bolts can be removed for one action point, if 
it is even necessary to do so).
     



      Hooked
 arrows and bolts are often used for latching onto a wall. You can 
attach rope to a hooked arrow or bolt for 1 action point and, when it 
strikes a wall, you’ll be able to climb up or zip-line down the rope to 
where the arrow or bolt struck.
     



      Signal
     



      Signal
 arrows and bolts are known for their whistling qualities. They are 
extremely loud and will let everyone in a large area know that they were
 shot. Signal bolts and arrows, however, have a damage class 1 lower 
than normal.
     







      Armor
     



      Armor
 comes in many shapes and sizes, types and qualities. Armor can be made 
out of leather, bone, iron, steel, bronze, or numerous other materials. 
Armor was for many years a requirement for warriors, but recently has 
gone down in popularity with the rise in magnetech weaponry. 
Nonetheless, it remains a common sight on the battlefield.
     



      Using
 Armor: There are five degrees of armor - minimal, light, medium, heavy,
 and super-heavy. Armor negatively affects a person’s evade roll and 
speed, but gives them a great amount of damage soak. The “soak class” 
works the exact same way as damage class - for every tier you receive on
 your defense roll, you soak that damage. For example, if you received a
 tier 2 soak in heavy armor (soak class of 4), you would soak 8 damage 
from the attack.
     



      Penalties:
 Armor negatively affects your evade, speed, and ability to move about. 
You’ll suffer a penalty to evade, a penalty to your land-based movement,
 and a penalty to your climbing and swimming speeds while wearing armor.
     



      Describing
 your Armor: How your armor looks is up to you and your narrator. Thick 
robes could be defined as light armor, but so could a breastplate. 
Chainmail covered in fish bones and a suit of field plate could both be 
heavy armor. How you describe your armor is your choice.
     







      Type        Soak Class        Evade
     



      Penalty        Speed
     



      Penalty        Climbing &
     



      Swimming Penalty        Material Options
     



      Unarmored        0        -        -0
 ft.        -0 
ft.        None, Organic, or 
Textile
     



      Minimal        1        -        -0
 ft.        -0 
ft.        Metal, Organic, or 
Textile
     



      Light        2        -1        -5
 ft.        -5 ft. 
        Metal, Organic, or 
Textile
     



      Medium        3        -2        -5
 ft.        -10 ft. 
        Metal or Organic
     



      Heavy        4        -3        -10
 ft.        -15 
ft.        Metal or Organic
     



      Super-Heavy        5        -4        -10
 ft.        -20 
ft.        Metal
     







      Donning your Armor
     



      For
 thick suits, putting on your armor can be quite an ordeal, and when 
you’re awoken in the middle of the night in nothing but your skivvies, 
you might need to put some armor on pronto.
     



      Type        Time to Don        With Help
     



      Unarmored        -
     



      Minimal        3 AP
     



      Light        6 AP
     



      Medium        24 AP        12 AP
     



      Heavy        3 minutes        1 minute
     



      Super-Heavy        10 minutes        3 minutes
     







      Deflection Items
     



      A
 shield is used for deflecting incoming attacks. While the term “shield”
 indeed provokes in the mind a large, bulwark strapped on one arm and 
used to protect the body, this is not the only defensive item used. 
Companion weapons, such as the parrying dagger and cloak are also 
common, and each has its own merits.
     



      You
 use shields and companion weapons to make deflections. A deflection 
costs 1 action point, and may be used whenever you are attacked.
     



      Cloak                +3
 to evade against melee attacks
     



      A
 cloak is often wrapped around one arm or, at the very least, guided by 
one arm, to blind opponents, throw off their weapons, and mislead them. A
 cloak can only be used against melee attacks, granting a +3 to evade 
for the deflection. The cloak, however, allows you to use your hand 
freely and make grabs.
     



      Material Options: Organic or Textile
     



      Parrying
 
Dagger                +3
 to evade against melee attacks
     



      The
 parrying dagger is used to deflect attacks while the primary weapon 
makes them. A dagger can only be used against melee attacks, granting a 
+3 to evade for the deflection roll. Furthermore, a dagger counts as a 
light weapon.
     



      Material Options: Metal, Organic, or Wood
     



      Shield        +4 to evade against melee and ranged attacks
     



      A
 shield is strapped onto the forearm and held with the hand. You can 
hold things with your shield hand, but - while doing so - you cannot 
make deflections. The shield grants you a +4 to evade for deflections, 
and can be used both against melee and ranged attacks.
     



      Material Options: Metal, Organic, or Wood
     







      Animals
     



      Movement c
     



      You
 only have to spend 1 action point a turn to guide your animal. It will 
spend as much of its own action points as it takes to get to the 
destination you designate. Your animal shares your turn, so this will 
happen instantly.
     



      Attacking & Other Options c
     



      To
 make your animal perform an action outside of moving, both you and it 
have to spend the number of action points it would take any normal 
character without specialties to perform the action.
     



      Upkeep c
     



      Now,
 most high-class establishments won’t allow animals inside, so remember 
to bring something to secure your animal outside of the building before 
going in. Also be prepared for paying for animal upkeep, which generally
 amounts to a duke a day for feed. Veterinarians aren’t commonplace, so 
be sure to keep your animal in good health.
     







      Horses
     



      The
 quintessential mount, fast horses and durable warhorses will transport 
any gentleman adventurer across the battlefield with ease. Simple enough
 to control, these noble beasts may not be strong in combat, but they 
will get you into or out of the fray.
     







      AP: 3                Cost: 100 princes
     



      HP: 16                Wounds: 9
     



      Priority: +0        Speed: 50 feet
     



      Note: If the horse spends all of its action points moving in a turn, it moves at twice its speed. A horse can be mounted.
     







      Guard
     



      Hide (natural organic armor)
     



      Eva: -1                Def: +1
     



      Soak:  3  |  6  |  9  |  12
     



      Note: Horses have two additional called shot locations for their legs, but have no arms or hands.
     







      Attacks
     



      Hoof (2 AP)
     



      Natural Medium Weapon
     



      Acc: +0                Stk: +1
     



      Damage:  6  |  12  |  18  |  24
     







      Skills                        Attributes
     



      Agility: +2                 Brute: +3
     



      Brawl: +1                Cunning: +0
     



      Overpower: +1                Dexterity: +2
     



      Resilience: +2                Spirit: +1
     



      Shamanism: +1                Sciences: +0
     







      Reference
     



      Specialties: Gallop, Large
     







      Stories: Four-Legged, Natural Armor
     







      Canines
     



      From
 wolves to coyotes to domesticated dogs, canines can be a gentleman 
adventurer’s best friend. Stronger while in large groups, canines are 
always a worthy ally.
     







      AP: 3                Cost: 35 princes
     



      HP: 12                Wounds: 8
     



      Priority: +0        Speed: 40 feet
     



      Note: A canine can be mounted by a gnome (and other similarly small people). A canine can track by scent alone.
     







      Guard
     



      Hide (natural organic armor)
     



      Eva: +0                Def: +0
     



      Soak:  2  |  4  |  6  |  8
     



      Note: Canines have two additional called shot locations for their legs, but have no arms or hands.
     







      Attacks
     



      Bite (2 AP)
     



      Natural Medium Weapon
     



      Acc: +1                Stk: +3
     



      Damage:  6  |  12  |  18  |  24
     



      Note:
 The canine gains a +1 to strike for each ally within 25 feet that also 
has the Pack Instincts story. The canine can begin a move, attack, and 
then complete the move.
     







      Skills                        Attributes
     



      Espionage: +1                 Brute: +2
     



      Frenzy:
 
+1                Cunning:
 +4 (+2 when tracking by scent
     



      Resilience:
 
+1                and
 another +2 when on guard)
     



      Showmanship: +2        Dexterity: +1
     



      Tactical: +2                Spirit: +0
     



      Sciences:
 +0
     







      Special
 Actions
     



      Howl (2 AP)
     



      The
 canine gives a (Showmanship +2: +1 | +2 | +3 | +4 ) bonus to strike to 
the next attack roll made by any allies within 25 feet.
     







      Reference
     



      Specialties: Bounding Lunge, Howl
     







      Stories: Four-Legged, Guard, Natural Armor, Pack Instincts, Scent
     







      Birds of Prey
     



      Trained
 birds are not only worthy companions, they’re also amazing messengers, 
guides, and scouts. With perfect spatial memory, they’ll always know how
 to return to previous locations.
     







      AP: 3                Cost: 45 princes
     



      HP: 11                Wounds: 8
     



      Priority: +0        Speed: 25 feet, 45 feet flight
     







      Guard
     



      Unarmored
     



      Eva: +1                Def: +0
     



      Soak:  0  |  0  |  0  |  0
     



      Note:
 Birds of prey have two additional called shot locations for their wings
 (which are treated as legs), but have no arms or hands.
     







      Attacks
     



      Talon (2 AP)
     



      Natural Light Weapon
     



      Acc: +3                Stk: +1
     



      Damage:  4  |  8  |  12  |  16
     



      Note:
 When the bird of prey has dived 10 or more feet before making an 
attack, the target must make a Brute resist against the bird’s agility 
(+2) or fall prone.
     







      Skills                        Attributes
     



      Ace: +1                 Brute: +1
     



      Agility:
 
+2                Cunning:
 +3 (+10 when noticing)
     



      Espionage: +2                Dexterity: +3
     



      Resilience: +1                Spirit: +0
     



      Tactical: +1                Sciences: +0
     







      Stances
     



      Thermal Gliding
     



      While in this stance, the bird of prey moves at double its flight speed.
     







      Reference
     



      Specialties: Death from Above, Thermal Gliding
     







      Stories: Eagle Eye, Innate Sense of Direction (can find its way back to any location it’s previously been), Small, Wings
     











      Equipment
     



      Adventuring Basics
     



      A
 beginning character has full reign to choose what they’d like from the 
following list. The selections must be reasonable (that is, only what 
you could logically carry), but we’ll let you be the judge of that. 
After character creation, you’ll need to purchase your supplies 
normally.
     



      If
 there’s something not on this list that you think you could have, go 
ahead and take it. If it’s something big, ask your narrator beforehand. 
We obviously haven’t included every piece of equipment that a character 
might start off with, so feel free to fill your character in as you’d 
like.
     







      Backpack        2 dukes
     



      A
 standard leather pack that can be used to carry supplies, provisions 
and tools.
     



      Bedroll        1 duke
     



      A
 set of cotton bedding that makes sleeping in the outdoors much more 
comfortable, especially in cold climates.
     



      Cable (25 ft)        5 princes
     



      Strings of metal wire woven together to form a sturdy metal rope.
     



      Case        1 duke
     



      A
 leather or wood case to keep scrolls from being warped by the elements.
 Holds up to two scrolls or maps.
     



      Chain (10 ft)        1 prince
     



      Large metal links connected end to end to form a long chain.
     



      Chalk        1 duke
     



      A white stick of gritty material that can be used to draw on stone or paper.
     



      Charcoal        1 duke
     



      Black
 nuggets of charcoal which, when set on fire, burn for an extended 
period of time. Can also be used to draw on stone or paper.
     



      Chest        1 prince
     



      A
 holding box of sorts, normally made of wood or a stronger material, and
 often accompanied by a lock.
     



      Clothing
     



      (working)        3 dukes
     



      Simple utilitarian clothing that would commonly be owned by the working class.
     



      Clothing
     



      (middle-class)        1 prince
     



      More formal clothing that could proudly be worn on the streets in a city.
     



      Clothing
     



      (gentry)        5+ princes
     



      Very
 elegant and formal dresswear that can be worn to any number of 
occasions. The cost of this good can range from 5 princes (a meager 
suit) to hundreds of princes.
     



      Crowbar        1 prince
     



      An Iron bar that uses leverage to pry open things such as doors and chests.
     



      Flare        10 princes
     



      A
 tube, filled with explosive chemicals which launches into the air and 
glows red.
     



      Glass Bottle        1 duke
     



      A glass container which can hold liquids without contaminating its contents.
     



      Grappling
     



      Hook        3 princes
     



      A
 three pronged iron hook which can be tied to a rope and used to reach 
high up places.
     



      Hose (10 ft)        10 princes
     



      A hollow rubber tube that can be used to funnel and direct liquids
     



      Inkpen        1 duke
     



      A small fountain pen with ink held inside and funneled to the tip.
     



      Journal        3 dukes
     



      A
 small, easily storable notebook which can be used to store important 
information or personal memoirs
     



      Ladder        2 dukes
     



      A
 ten foot ladder which can be propped up against walls to grant access 
to elevated areas.
     



      Lantern        2 dukes
     



      A gas-filled lantern that pushes darkness away 25 feet.
     



      Lockpicks        3 dukes
     



      Metal picks which are essential to opening locks.
     



      Magnifying
     



      Glass        1 prince
     



      A
 round glass lens which provides a clearer view of smaller objects and 
aids with delicate and detailed tasks.
     



      Metal
     



      Canister        4 dukes
     



      A metal cylinder designed to be resealable
     



      Musical
     



      Instrument        2 princes
     



      A
 musical instrument, usually made of wood, leather, hair, or bone 
depending on the type of instrument.
     



      Pole (5 ft,
     



      steel)        5 dukes
     



      A five foot long steel pole.
     



      Pole (5 ft,
     



      wood)        1 duke
     



      A five foot long wooden pole.
     



      Rope (25 ft)        4 dukes
     



      A
 25 foot length of woven fibers which can be used to climb, carry, bind,
 or tie just about anything together.
     



      Rations
     



      (1 day)        2 dukes
     



      Enough
 food stuffs to provide an average adult with enough energy to get 
through the day.
     



      Spyglass        10 princes
     



      Two
 magnifying glasses fitted to opposite ends of a cylinder which allows 
the user to see far into the distance.
     



      Tent        2 princes
     



      A
 large piece of canvas with supports which, when inside, provides some 
protection from inclement weather such as rain and snow.
     



      Torch        1 duke
     



      A
 wooden handle wrapped with a slow burning substance at one end that 
will provide light at night or in poorly lit areas.
     



      Vials        3 dukes
     



      A
 set of five glass vials and cork stoppers which can carry liquids 
without contaminating them.
     











      Armor & Shields
     



      Minimal        1 prince
     



      Light Armor        5 princes
     



      Medium Armor        15 princes
     



      Heavy Armor        40 princes
     



      Super-Heavy Armor        75 princes
     



      Shield        4 princes
     



      Cloak        1 prince
     



      Parrying Dagger        1 princes
     







      Weapons
     



      Light Melee Weapon        1 prince
     



      Medium Melee Weapon        7 princes
     



      Heavy Melee Weapon        15 princes
     



      Light Firearm        2 princes
     



      Medium Firearm        5 princes
     



      Heavy Firearm        12 princes
     



      Super-Heavy Firearm        20 princes
     



      Light Bow        5 dukes
     



      Medium Bow        1 prince
     



      Heavy Bow        5 princes
     



      Super-Heavy Bow        17 princes
     



      Light Crossbow        2 princes
     



      Medium Crossbow        4 princes
     



      Heavy Crossbow        7 princes
     



      Super-Heavy Crossbow        14 princes
     











      Can you have an animal?
     



      Animals
 (found a couple pages back) are obviously well outside your 10 prince 
starting budget, but for many characters, such as hunters and mounted 
knights, a horse or a dog might be necessary to your character concept. 
If it’s necessary, ask your narrator if you can have one. It’s probably 
okay.
     



      That
 said, if your concept is “I have a hundred hunting hounds that travel 
with me,” that might be a concept you need to work toward.
     











      For Sale
     



      Elympia Dark               4 princes per glass, 40 princes per bottle
     



      One
 of the most popular drinks in Evangless, this satyr-brewed dark lager 
never fails to pick one’s spirits up. Its rich flavor restores 4 hit 
points per glass. A bottle contains 10 glasses worth. It costs 1 AP per 
glass to drink. Please drink responsibly.
     



      CRIMSON                        
         
                 
  30 princes
     



      by Crimson Marshal Lucinda Mirasol
     



      This
 controversial fashion line by the infamous Evanglessian militarist 
didn’t get its name simply for its creator’s rank; each piece cannot be 
caught on tier 1 fire! This clothing counts as minimal armor and is 
guaranteed to look downright dashing in every season.
     



      Mindcuffs                        
               
             3 
princes
     



      Developed by the Dolby 
Home for the Scientifically Unstable, these handcuffs can be used for 
one action point grabs. Attachable to a maximum of two body parts, any 
hands or legs grabbed become unusable. Perfect for keeping any 
doomsday-machine obsessed evil genius unable to build, the target can 
only free a body part by making a tier 2 Brute resist or by the cuffs’ 
owner releasing them.
     



      Water 
Filter                                
              15 
princes
     



      An essential gadget for
 safari hunters and desert scavengers alike, this handy tool attaches to
 any flask or bottle. Simply by tipping it over you will pour out any 
impurities leaving only the cleanest of water behind. It can be used 15 
times before breaking and is concealable.
     



      p Spendo-Brand Trinkets M
     



      Any-Altitude
 
Parachute                        
    4 princes
     



      This 
state-of-the-art parachute by Spendo deploys quickly for one reflexive 
action point whenever you’re falling. Never take falling damage again! 
While not concealable, its multi-stage deployment process ensures it 
will protect whether you fall 5 feet or 500 feet!
     



      Spendo-Brand: 91.6% Guaranteed!
     



      Gas-Fabulous                        
               
 4 princes
     



      Based on a 
design by the Coaldust Unions of Evangless, this handy gasmask gives its
 wearer a +4 to resists against alchemical gases. But you shouldn’t buy 
from them, oh no! Buy your gasmask from Spendo and his hard-working 
artisans will customize the mask’s appearance for free!
     



      Spendo-Brand: 91.6% Guaranteed!
     



      Spendo-Grenade                                
    3 princes
     



      Sometimes
 you just have to blow something up. Spendo understands. That’s why he 
created the Spendo-Grenade. This concealable bomb is a statuette of 
Spendo the gnome himself (if Spendo smelled like gunpowder, had dark 
green skin and clothes, and made ticking sounds like a bomb). It costs 1
 action point to activate the bomb and 2 action points to throw it. It 
will explode at the beginning of your next turn. It deals 10 damage to 
everyone in your target square and all squares adjacent to it. People in
 those squares can spend 1 action point to attempt a resist the 
impending explosion with their Dexterity. If they receive a tier 2 
result or higher, they take no damage and move out of the blast range.
     



      Spendo-Brand: 91.6% Guaranteed!
     



      Spendo-Brand
 
Illumitorch                
    2 princes
     



      Whether
 you’re afraid of the dark or simply can’t see in it, Spendo the gnome 
has the perfect fix! Torches are hot and can burn you; that’s dangerous!
 Use Spendo’s illumitorches instead! Easily wielded in one hand and 
concealable, Spendo illumitorches consist of small hand-cranked bulbs 
which project light 25 feet around themselves.
     



      Spendo-Brand: 91.6% Guaranteed!
     



      The
 
Lawn-Deformer                        
  32 princes
     



      Spendo brings
 you his newest product in his line of landscaping tools. Designed with 
vigilante gardeners in mind, this nifty chainsaw acts as a medium 
weapon. Whenever you successfully hit an opponent, you can spend an 
action point to deal 1 unsoakable damage to them by spinning the 
chainsaw blades. This can be done as many times as you have remaining 
action points during your current turn.
     



      Spendo-Brand: 91.6% Guaranteed!
     



      Protective
 
Goggles                        
  10 princes
     



      Spendo 
doesn’t like dirt in his eyes. Neither should you! These handy 
industrial goggles protect you from dirt and other things too! They 
grant you +1 to your soak class against called shots to your eyes and a 
+3 to Brute resists against anything that would affect your eyes.
     



      Spendo-Brand: 91.6% Guaranteed!
     















      p MaskedMen Inc.* M
     



      Grapple-Gun                                
    6 princes
     



      Perfect
 for the gentleman thief on the run, this grapple-gun can propel up to 
50 feet of chain, rope, or cable and will attach to rocky, magnetic, 
rough, or slick surfaces. It will increase your climb speed by 20 feet 
while you retract the cord towards its latch. It costs 1 action point to
 shoot your grapple-gun, 1 action point to unlatch it, and 1 action 
point to retract it to climb. Just be wary, this trinket isn’t 
concealable.
     



      MaskedMen Inc.
     



      Unleash Your Inner Rogue!
     



      Heat-Sight
 
Monocle                        
  10 princes
     



      You’re in the
 middle of a barfight. Your chosen foe pushes a table on its side and 
ducks behind it. Your curiosity piques. What is he doing back there? 
With a Heat-Sight monocle from MaskedMen Incorporated, you could see his
 heat signature clear as day! This handy monocle allows you to see heat 
through anything deemed poor cover.
     



      MaskedMen Inc.
     



      Unleash Your Inner Rogue!
     



      Hidden
 
Intentions                
       8 princes per dose
     



      At
 MaskedMen Incorporated, we believe subtlety is the greatest weapon in 
any gentleman’s arsenal. Simply add a dose of Hidden Intentions to your 
target’s food or drink. Requiring a Tier 3 Cunning resist to detect the 
added ingredient in their meal, your target will take 6 unsoakable 
damage roughly 6 seconds or three action points after they ingest it.
     



      MaskedMen Inc.
     



      Unleash Your Inner Rogue!
     



      Reasonable
 
Doubt                        
    8 princes
     



      The 
premier product of MaskedMen Incorporated, this automated lockpicking 
device keeps the lock fingerprint-free. It spends 1 action point 
lockpicking any lock it’s attached to whenever your action points 
refresh. One-handed and concealable, you can place it on a lock for 1 
action point or throw it at a lock for 2 action points.
     



      MaskedMen Inc.
     



      Unleash Your Inner Rogue!
     







      *Though
 there are some rumors concerning the legitimacy and morality of 
MaskedMen Incorporated, all of their agents have been very forthright 
with us and leave us no reason to question the validity of their 
company.
     











      p Red-Gate Securities M
     



      Chains
 of 
Security                        
  10 princes
     



      Back by 
popular demand, Red-Gate Security is proud to present the Chains of 
Security! Attachable to any item, a single chain can secure an item to 
its owner’s hands, granting the wielder a +2 on resists against the item
 being disarmed.
     



      Red-Gate: Keeping Evangless Safe
     



      Tinted
 
Glasses                                
  10 princes
     



      Standard-issue
 for the Evanglessian military police, these stylish pieces of eyewear 
art by Red-Gate Security protect your eyes from the harmful rays of the 
sun, as well as any flashes of light. Wearing them grants you a +3 to 
resist being blinded by flashes of light.
     



      Red-Gate: Keeping Evangless Safe
     











      p Burgenhind Industries M
     



      Graviton
 
Board                                
  85 princes
     



      A small 
hoverboard perfect for anyone wanting to travel in style, this premium 
clanker by Burgenhind Industries may not fly through the air, but it 
quickly skims across land and the surface of water! With a speed of 40 
feet per action point and 12 wounds (losing 5 feet of speed whenever it 
takes damage), you’ll be the envy of all pedestrians in your path!
     



      Burgenhind Industries: Need a Lift?
     



      The
 Fashionable 
Arrival                
          3,200 princes
     



      The
 latest in personal transportation clankers by Burgenhind Industries, 
this graviton-sphere powered pack features a stylish brass finish and 
fits comfortably on the back of any tailcoat or corset. For every action
 point you spend moving it, the Fashionable Arrival will fly up to 40 
feet. It has 12 wounds and loses 5 feet of movement whenever damaged. If
 you aren’t arriving fashionably, why show up at all?
     



      Burgenhind Industries: Need a Lift?
     




















      Chapter 6 - Brute
     







      Brute
 is a measurement of your beefiness, your ability to stand and take 
punishment, and the strength you put behind your actions. The brute is 
strong, difficult to take down, will fight the longest and push the 
hardest. If you’re the brute amongst your fellow adventurers, odds are 
you’ll be meleeing opponents while your friends stand back. You’ll be 
the one taking hits and dealing them in kind.
     







      What can you do with your Brute attribute?
     







      Breath Holding
     



      Whether
 it be diving into a lake to grab treasure from the bottom, or 
attempting to not breathe in a poisonous gas, you’re doing your best to 
keep clean air inside your lungs for as long as possible.
     



      Last
 Breath: When you decide that you’re going to hold your breath, you 
immediately take a gulp of air and hold it. From that point on, you can 
hold your breath based on your Brute roll:
     



      15 turns (about a minute and a half)
     



      30 turns (about three minutes)
     



      75 turns (about seven and a half minutes)
     



      200 turns (about twenty minutes)
     







      No
 Last Breath: However, if you were caught by surprise by the sudden lack
 of air and didn’t have enough time to take a breath, that’s going to 
drastically lower the amount of time you can hold your breath. Instead, 
your brute roll will use this chart:
     



      5 turns (about half a minute)
     



      10 turns (about a minute)
     



      20 turns (about two minutes)
     



      40 turns (about four minutes)
     







      Difficult Lifting
     



      You
 can use your bodily strength to attempt to pick heavy things up to move
 them. Lifting can also be applied when using your strength to move 
something attempting to crush your party, such as a boulder falling on 
the party or a lowering ceiling trap.
     



      You
 can barely lift it. After 3 turns, you’ll drop it, and you cannot move 
while holding it.
     



      You
 can lift it and move, but it costs 2 extra action points to do so. 
After 10 turns, you’ll drop it.
     



      You
 can lift it and move around fairly easily. It costs 1 extra action 
point to move, and you can hold it for 30 turns.
     



      The
 object is proving to be no problem. You can move normally and put it 
down at your leisure.
     







      Forceful Intimidation
     



      Resist: Brute or Spirit (at their discretion, tiers down)
     



      Attempt Cost: 1 AP
     



      You’re
 big, strong, and scary, and they should avoid you at all costs! You can
 intimidate anyone, regardless of whether or not they can actually 
understand you. You can intimidate anyone who can see you.
     



      They are noticeably aware of your physical prowess.
     



      They
 feel inclined to avoid you, making them unable to spend their next 
action point against you.
     



      They
 know they should avoid you, making them unable to spend their next two 
action points against you.
     



      They
 want nothing less than to avoid you, making them unable to spend their 
next three action points against you!
     







      Note: A single target can only be affected by one intimidation at a time.
     



      Hold
     



      Brute
 can be used for holding an item in place, a door shut, and keeping a 
firm grip on a priceless artifact. If you are holding something, and 
another person is trying to get it, you would simply make opposed Brute 
rolls. Since you’re acting defensively, if there is a tie, they win.
     



      Pulling
     



      Instead
 of attempting to lift an object, you choose to pull it on the ground. 
While easier, pulling an object requires extra effort to move.
     



      Move +3 AP (not possible if you only have 3 AP per turn)
     



      Move +2 AP
     



      Move +1 AP
     



      As a Move
     







      Narrator: Determining Weight
     



      Obviously
 certain objects are going to be heavier than others. The bigger the 
object, the higher the penalty (or bonus) to Brute when attempting to 
lift or pull. A giant statue should be coupled with a high penalty to 
Brute. However, lifting should only be used when a large amount of 
strength would be required. For example, players shouldn’t have to roll 
on lifting a small box of feathers. Another thing to note is the 
object’s surface. A wide, completely flat-surfaced stone block may be 
lifted, but has no hand-holes to be pulled by.
     












      Brawl Skill
     



      Brawlers
 have no respect for such things as personal space, codes of honor, or 
traditional weaponry. They fight hard, they fight dirty, and they fight 
to win. Brawlers are often experts with unarmed blows and using their 
fearsome strength to cripple, grab, and kill their enemies. Yet 
sometimes too will an enormous man with an even more enormous axe get 
right in and brawl as well.
     







      Block with a Grab
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Cost: 0 AP reflexively
     



      When
 your opponent throws their punch at you, you don’t just block their 
fist: you grab hold of it. Whenever you successfully evade an attack by 
an opponent who is within your reach and you are able to grab them, you 
may automatically (and for 0 action points) attempt a grab upon their 
hand (or, if they attacked you with a different body part, the grab will
 be upon that location).
     



      Dirty Fighting
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You’re
 an expert at hitting where it hurts and causing the opponent to flinch.
 While you are in this stance, every time your opponent fails to resist 
one of your called shots, they open themselves to reflexive attacks from
 those adjacent to them. The reflexive attacks cost the normal amount of
 action points from those who decide to take the opportunity. Since you 
caused it, you cannot make a reflexive attack from this.
     











      Drunken Boxing
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Cost: Called Shot +1 AP
     



      When
 you make a called shot, it’s so wild and unpredictable that it’s 
difficult to evade. When you make a drunken called shot (whether you’re 
sober or not), you roll your die to determine the called shot location 
randomly. By doing this, you give yourself a bonus to your accuracy 
equal to your skill in Brawl.
     



      Fisticuffs
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Bare-knuckle
 boxing is your forté. When you enter this stance, you are ready to do 
some serious damage using just your fists. You can only be in this 
stance if you have at least one hand not holding anything. While in this
 stance, your unarmed attacks are one damage class higher, plus an 
additional damage class per 6 skill points you have in Brawl.
     



      So,
 if you have 12 points in Brawl, while you’re in this stance, your 
unarmed attack would have a damage class of 5 (2 normally, plus 1 for 
the stance, plus an additional 2 for the 12 points you have in Brawl).
     



      Fluid
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 control all those who attack you. Any time an adjacent opponent attacks
 you but you successfully evade, you may spend 1 action point 
reflexively to move your attacker into any adjacent, unoccupied space 
that has solid, non-lethal ground for them to stand upon.
     



















      Grapple
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Once
 you grab somebody, you can turn it into a full on grapple, shutting 
down their ability to move and making it difficult for them to take any 
actions. You must be grabbing somebody to enter a grapple stance, and 
you can only stay in this stance while grabbing that person (thus, if 
they resist, you are knocked out of stance). Anything that would let 
them break free of the grab will automatically knock you out of this 
stance. When you switch your grab to a grapple, you are no longer 
grabbing a single location - instead, you are now grappling their entire
 body. (For the purposes of other specialties, however, it still counts 
as a grab.)
     



      A
 person who is grappled by you cannot move, just like being grabbed. If 
they try to take any action, they suffer penalties on every roll they 
make. Any time a grappled opponent rolls their die (except for random 
rolls), roll your Brawl, tier the results, and give them the 
corresponding penalty to their roll.
     



      -3 on the roll
     



      -6 on the roll
     



      -9 on the roll
     



      -12 on the roll
     







      Heavy-Handed
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Cost: Unarmed Attack +1 AP
     



      The
 blows from your unarmed attacks are so powerful that they feel like 
they’re coming from giant hammers. When you make a heavy-handed attack, 
roll your Brawl before you deal damage but after you’ve succeeded in 
your accuracy roll in order to increase the damage class that you deal.
     



      +3 damage class
     



      +4 damage class
     



      +5 damage class
     



      +6 damage class
     







      Hold Steady
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      You’ll
 grab the bloke while your friends beat the tar out of him. When you’re 
grabbing somebody, anybody who attacks that person gains a hefty 
accuracy bonus. They get +3 on their accuracy roll, +1 for every 4 skill
 points you have in Brawl (being a +4 at 4 points, a +5 at 8 points, and
 so forth).
     











      Knock Aside
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Cost: Deflect (1 AP reflexively)
     



      With
 a swift knock, you can push aside an attack with the sheer force of 
your body. You may reflexively deflect attacks from melee weapons, bows,
 or thrown weapons with your bare hands. When you use such a deflection,
 you gain a bonus to your evade of +3, plus an additional +1 per 8 skill
 points you have in Brawl (for +4 at 8 skill points, +5 at 16 skill 
points, and +6 at 24 skill points).
     



      Monkey Wrestler
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Requires: 5 skill points in Brawl
     



      You
 wrap your legs around their torso, sink your teeth into their arm, grab
 their face, wrap your elbow around their eyes, and you still have a 
spare hand to use your dagger. For every 5 points you have in Brawl, you
 may grab an additional location on a person. Normally you can only grab
 two locations (assuming you have two hands). You may choose not to use 
your hands to initiate a grab if you have enough points to do so.
     



      Reversal
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      The
 only person who’ll be doing the grabbing in this fight is you. If 
someone successfully grabs you, you can attempt to reverse the grab and 
capture your captor. Re-roll your resist for your opponent’s grab, but 
add your skill in Brawl to the roll. If you succeed, they must roll a 
resist against your Brawl to avoid getting grabbed on a called-shot 
location of your choice.
     



      Shrug Away
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Let’s
 just say that you don’t like being touched. If you are successfully 
grabbed, you may immediately make another resist (at no action point 
cost) with your Brawl skill added to the attribute you’re using to 
resist.
     



      Throat Jab
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Resist: Brute (negates)
     



      Cost: Called Shot to the Neck reflexively
     



      If
 anybody adjacent to you begins to speak, you can make a called shot to 
their neck reflexively in order to shut them up. If they fail on their 
resist, they cannot talk or use their voice (including using specialties
 that rely on speaking, like Encouragement) until they either spend 1 
action point to clear their throat or they wait until the end of their 
next turn.
     



      p Bone-Breaking Specialties M
     



      Bone-Breaker
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Cost: Unarmed Called Shot +1 AP
     



      You
 smash a precision blow into the opponent, causing a called shot that’s 
nearly impossible to resist. Do your called shot normally. If they 
succeed in resisting, you are able to roll your strike again to make 
them re-resist. The bone-breaker only does damage based on the original 
strike.
     



      1 re-roll
     



      2 re-rolls
     



      3 re-rolls
     



      4 re-rolls
     







      Crippling Blow
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Requires: Bone-Breaker specialty, 8 skill points in Brawl
     



      Cost: Bone-Breaking Attack, +1 AP per location
     



      Your
 bone-breaking attack reverberates through the victim, crippling much of
 their body. When you make your bone-breaking attack, you may spend an 
extra action point in order to have the same bone-breaker effect against
 another called shot location. You may affect as many called shot 
locations as you’d like - each one costs 1 additional action point.
     



      So,
 say you make a bone-breaker attack against a person’s neck. You get a 
tier 3 on your bone-breaker, so they have to make (a ridiculous) 4 
resists in order to not be affected. In addition, you spend 2 extra 
action points to activate the called shot effects for the torso and the 
hand, which now also require 4 resists to avoid.
     















































      p Combo Specialties M
     



      Combo Flow
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Brawl
     



      You
 rage like rapids, following the path of least resistance. Every melee 
attack that you land during a turn grants you a +2 on accuracy and 
strike rolls for the rest of your turn, and this bonus accumulates with 
every successful melee attack until the end of your turn.
     



      So,
 if you landed one melee attack, your next attack would have a +2 on 
accuracy and strike. After your second successful attack, the third one 
would have a +4 on accuracy and strike. This would continue to grow with
 every successful attack.
     



      Combo Opener
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Requires: Combo Flow specialty
     



      Cost: Unarmed Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 may perform a combo opener in order to improve the potency of your 
combo flow. If you successfully land your combo opener (which for most 
purposes just looks like a normal unarmed attack), it might count as 
having successfully landed multiple attacks.
     



      Counts
 as two attacks (granting a +4 on accuracy and strike for the next 
attack).
     



      Counts
 as three attacks (granting a +6 on accuracy and strike for the next 
attack).
     



      Counts
 as four attacks (granting a +8 on accuracy and strike for the next 
attack).
     



      Counts
 as five attacks (granting a +10 on accuracy and strike for the next 
attack).
     







      Combo Breaker
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Any
 time an adjacent opponent successfully damages you with two separate 
attacks in one turn, you may perform a combo breaker - a free unarmed 
attack against your assailant that uses your skill in Brawl in place of 
your accuracy.
     



      Finisher
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Requires: Heavy-Handed specialty
     



      If
 you successfully make two unarmed attacks in one turn and still have an
 additional action point, you can make a finisher. A finisher is just 
like a heavy-handed attack, except that it does not cost the extra 
action point to perform.
     



      p Grip Specialties M
     



      Crushing Grip
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Requires: +4 Strike
     



      Your
 grabs are vicious, crushing the opponent. When you make a grab, you 
also deal damage as if you were attacking with the attack normally.
     







      Twist
     



      Brawl Specialty
     



      Requires: Crushing Grip specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Once
 you have a person grabbed with a hand, you may twist that location to 
inflict pain. For 1 action point, you may automatically deal damage as 
per an unarmed attack (without the need to roll accuracy and evade). You
 may also, for 1 action point, activate the called shot that you have 
grabbed, rolling strike solely to determine the necessary resist but 
otherwise doing no damage. Though this does deal damage, it does not act
 as an attack.
     
















      Frenzy Skill
     



      Frenzy
 is an emotionally-charged rage, throwing yourself out there and giving 
people everything they don’t want. Frenzy’s not for the weak - you lose 
control easily and take haphazard movements all over the battlefield. 
When you’ve broken your limits, you are literally uncontrollable. Yet 
your opponents will never know this weakness. They’ll be dead long 
before that.
     







      Adrenaline Surge
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      The
 deaths of your opponents sends a reinvigorating rush through your body 
that pushes you to continue fighting. Whenever you deal a fatal effect 
or kill an opponent, you regain some of your hit points.
     



      Immediately regain 3 hit points
     



      Immediately regain 6 hit points
     



      Immediately regain 9 hit points
     



      Immediately regain 12 hit points
     







      Backlash
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Requires: 7 skill points in Frenzy
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Large
 amounts of damage don’t stop you - rather, they enrage you! Any time 
you take 10 or more damage (after damage soak), you can make a reflexive
 attack against your assailant using your skill in frenzy in place of 
your accuracy. This reflexive attack only costs you 1 action point to 
make.
     







      Burning Revenge
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Your
 foe drives you to greater strength. If an opponent damages you, you may
 “collect” that damage in order to add it as a bonus on your next strike
 roll against that opponent. When you are hit, you may spend 1 action 
point reflexively to savor the damage (after damage soak). The next time
 you attack that opponent, you gain the damage as a bonus on the strike 
roll.
     







      Carry Through
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP per adjacent opponent
     



      You
 carry your blow through one opponent and into another. Once you’ve 
successfully attacked one opponent within your melee reach, you may 
continue the attack, cleaving through more opponents within your reach. 
For every additional opponent you choose, you must spend 1 more action 
point. You may not select the same opponent twice. You must still roll 
accuracy to determine if you hit, but you deal the same amount of damage
 that you dealt with the first attack.
     



      If
 you were using any other modifying specialties (that would make it an 
“Attack +1 AP”), they only apply to the first target.
     







      Crimson Weapon
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Resist: Brute (tiers down)
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 learn to make your weapon strike slice deep into the flesh of your 
foes. If an opponent takes damage from your crimson weapon, they will 
begin bleeding at the start of their next turn (and ever turn 
thereafter). Bleeding damage is unsoakable, but the opponent can roll 
their Brute to lower the tier result. A person can stop 5 points worth 
of bleeding by spending 1 action point patching the wound.
     



      Bleed for 2 damage per turn
     



      Bleed for 4 damage per turn
     



      Bleed for 6 damage per turn
     



      Bleed for 8 damage per turn
     







      Fray Fighter
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      An
 angry mob of slobbering beasts stare you down, looking to rip you apart
 piece by piece. For you, this is just another day at work. Using a 
heavy or smaller melee weapon, you can engage the fray. Roll your tier 
to determine how many opponents adjacent to you that you hit. They are 
allowed to roll defense against the attacks.
     



      Tier 1 damage to 2 adjacent opponents
     



      Tier 1 damage to 3 adjacent opponents
     



      Tier 1 damage to 4 adjacent opponents
     



      Tier 1 damage to all adjacent opponents
     







      Hundred Strikes
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Cost: All of the AP you can spend in a single turn
     



      When
 you choose to use your hundred strikes ability, you must still have 
your maximum amount of action points for the turn and be wielding a 
heavy or smaller melee weapon. You designate a single adjacent opponent 
as the target of your hundred strikes. For one action point apiece, you 
can make a melee attack against that opponent. After every attack, you 
and the target move a single space. The target chooses which space he 
will move into, and you must either follow or forego the rest of your 
turn.
     







      Liberator
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 don’t like being touched, held, grabbed, or grappled. Whenever you are 
grabbed, you can make a melee attack called shot against the person 
grabbing you in whatever way is going to get them off (often by making a
 called shot against their hand, but you can also make a called shot 
against their torso to push them away, or a called shot against whatever
 else they’re using to grab you). You can do this reflexively when they 
first grab you, and, if you fail, you can continue to make these melee 
called shots against your assailant for just 1 action point until they 
let go.
     







      Merciless
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Once
 you go down this path, there’s no going back. Once you enter your 
merciless stance, you cannot voluntarily exit it. Upon entering, you 
choose a target of the stance. As long as you are aware of the target or
 believe the target to be within a couple hundred feet, you cannot exit 
your stance. While in this stance, you can only attack your target and 
people who are directly preventing you from getting to your target. If 
you are not engaged with your target, you must spend at least 1 action 
point every turn moving toward your target.
     



      While
 this stance is active, once per turn you may use your skill in frenzy 
as a bonus to any one of your combat rolls, or divide it among several. 
For example, you may add your skill in frenzy to one strike roll, or you
 may give half of your skill in frenzy to one accuracy roll and the 
other half to one evade roll. These combat rolls must be made in 
opposition of the target of your merciless stance.
     







      Neverending Bloodbath
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      For every enemy you kill during your turn, you gain 1 action point that can only be used for running toward another enemy.
     







      No Escape
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Cost: As Moving, reflexively
     



      Though
 your enemies may attempt to retreat, you’re prepared to give chase. Any
 time a foe that you’re engaged with attempts to move away from you 
using their land speed, you reflexively follow them. If an opponent’s 
speed is greater than yours (but within 20 feet), you rise to the 
challenge and match their speed.
     







      Raging
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Nothing
 can stop you. You will destroy everything in your path. When you make 
an attack while raging, you pull your bonuses from your accuracy, evade,
 and defense in order to add them to your strike roll. Add your 
accuracy, evade, and defense bonuses together and apply that number as a
 bonus to your strike. While in this stance, however, you do not gain 
any bonuses on your accuracy, evade, or defense rolls. If you leave this
 stance (either voluntarily or by being forced out of it), you do not 
gain your bonuses to evade and defense back until the end of your next 
turn.
     







      Straining Blow
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Cost: as a Melee Attack
     



      You
 push yourself to your maximum, destroying yourself in order to lay 
waste to your opponents. When you make a straining blow, you may deal 5 
unsoakable hit point damage to yourself in order to add a +1 damage 
class to your attack. You may deal as much damage to yourself as you’d 
like in order to gain additional damage classes, but you cannot deal 
more damage to yourself than you have hit points. Once you are out of 
hit points, you cannot deal straining blows.
     







      Soulless Blade
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      When
 you mean to finish an opponent, you do so mercilessly. After you’ve 
made a melee attack that deals wounds damage to the target, you may 
spend 2 action points reflexively in order to convert it into a soulless
 blade. Now, instead of rolling on the wounds chart, they roll for a 
fatal effect.
     







      Walking Destruction
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Requires: 15 skill points in Frenzy
     



      Cost: Move + Melee Attack + 2 AP
     



      You
 make a single move. During this move, you may attack anybody that you 
become adjacent to. You may not target the same person more than once.
     



      Other specialties cannot be applied to this attack.
     







      p Bloodlust Specialties M
     



      Berserker
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      The
 sight of blood excites you. After successfully dealing damage to an 
opponent, you a gain +1 damage class against that opponent with all 
melee weapons. This bonus increases by +1 for every 6 skill points you 
have in frenzy. This bonus can be used against multiple opponents.
     







      Bloodlust
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Requires: Berserker specialty & 6 skill points in Frenzy
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      In
 the whirling chaos of battle you are a singular force of destruction - 
relentless and unstoppable. When you enter into berserker stance, you 
may spend an additional action point to upgrade your stance and start 
bloodlusting. While bloodlusting, your damage class with melee weapons 
increases by 1 for every enemy within 25 feet of you.
     



      This
 bonus replaces the normal bonus you would get from your berserker 
stance. It is automatically added to all melee weapon attacks, 
regardless of whether you have attacked the foe before or not.
     



      If
 you are knocked out of berserker stance, you must re-enter the stance 
and spend the extra action point to begin bloodlusting again.
     







      Unquenchable Thirst
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Requires: Berserker & Bloodlust specialties & 12 skill points in Frenzy
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Your
 unquenchable thirst for blood has become a full-fledged obsession. 
After you have entered your berserker stance and started bloodlusting, 
you may spend another action point to upgrade to unquenchable thirst. 
Now, everybody within 25 feet of you acts as an enemy (including allies)
 for the purpose of determining your bloodlust bonus. You may now make 
normal melee attacks (with a heavy weapon or smaller) for just 1 action 
point, but if anybody comes near you, enemy or ally, you are forced to 
make a reflexive melee attack against them, if at all possible.
     



      If
 you are knocked out of berserker stance, you must re-enter the stance 
and spend the extra actions point to begin bloodlusting and enter 
unquenchable thirst again.
     











      p Masochistic Specialties M
     



      Laugh Like You’re Crazy
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Resist: Spirit (negates)
     



      You’re
 a manic, psychotic, laughing vision of evil on the battlefield. For 
every 10 points of hit point damage you’ve taken, choose one opponent 
within 25 feet. That opponent is now suffering the effects of tier 1 
fear. They may resist using their Spirit against your frenzy. If they 
resist, they cannot be affected again until after their next breather.
     







      Marriage to Suffering
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Requires: Laugh Like You’re Crazy specialty
     



      When
 fighting on the edge, you fight even harder. When out of hit points, 
you gain a +1 damage class per point of wounds lost. This damage bonus 
is lost if your hitpoints are no long zero.
     







      Seize Your Suffering
     



      Frenzy Specialty
     



      Requires: 8 skill points in Frenzy, Laugh Like You’re Crazy & Marriage to Suffering specialties
     



      Taking
 punishment has become your nourishment on the battlefield. For every 
point of wounds damage you take, you gain an immediate action point. The
 action point only lasts for the turn the damage was taken. You may gain
 no more than 1 action point from this in a single turn than 1 per 8 
skill points you have in Frenzy.
     



      For
 example, if you take 3 wounds damage this turn, you gain 3 action 
points in addition to your normal allotment of action points for this 
turn.
     
















      Overpower Skill
     



      The
 ability to overpower an opponent is not one to be overlooked. Nothing 
can be scarier than a man whose blows can fell giants, strikes are so 
powerful that they can send a man high into the air, or swings so 
atrocious that they can sever the fabric that holds our reality 
together. Overpower is all about hitting your opponent hard and making 
sure that they never forget who it was that gave them that scar - the 
one on their shoulder, where their arm used to be.
     







      Brickbreaker
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Cost: as a Melee Attack
     



      Through
 sheer force you are able to break through cover and bypass walls. 
Whenever an opponent is on the other side of cover, you may attempt to 
bypass it with your melee attack (they must still be within range of 
your melee weapon, however). You can only break through cover that is as
 strong as brick. A reinforced wall of iron could not be broken with 
brickbreaker, for instance. The cover is not destroyed from the 
brickbreaker attack, but it is damaged.
     



      Bypasses poor cover
     



      Bypasses light cover
     



      Bypasses medium cover
     



      Bypasses heavy cover
     







      Dragging
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 pull your weapon behind you, letting your weapon take your entire body 
weight upwards when you swing. Anytime that you deal 10 or more damage 
(after damage soak), the enemy loses their stance.
     







      Follow-Through
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Overpower
     



      While
 your first attack can leave an opponent realing, your second attack is a
 true display of your power. If you make two consectutive and successful
 medium (or larger) melee attacks on your turn against the same 
opponent, your second attack’s damage is automatically one tier higher.
     







      Heavy Hitter
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Overpower
     



      Whenever
 in this stance and using a heavy (or larger) melee weapon, add an extra
 point to your damage class for every 4 skill points you have in 
overpower.
     







      Keep Them Down
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Cost: Heavy (or larger) Melee Attack
     



      When
 an opponent is next to you and prone, you have no problem finishing 
them off. Whenever attacking a prone opponent with a heavy weapon, your 
damage automatically tiers up one.
     







      Monstrous Attacks
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Cost: Super-Heavy Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      Other
 people think that super-heavy melee weapons have a damage class of 10. 
You’re not sure what that means, but you know you can kill those people 
in one hit! By spending an extra action point when you make an attack 
with a super-heavy melee weapon, you deal considerably more damage. Your
 damage class increases by 2, plus an additional +1 per 6 skill points 
you have in overpower.
     







      No Quarter
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates, see below)
     



      Cost: Heavy (or larger) Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 smash down, not targeting a single person, but their entire area. The 
only escape is for the target to move. When you make a no quarter 
attack, you are not attacking the person: you are attacking a single 
space. Anybody in this space is either automatically hit or must spend 1
 action point reflexively in order to try to jump out of the space. If 
they choose to dodge, they roll their Dexterity. If their Dexterity 
exceeds your accuracy, they can move to 1 adjacent square. If it fails, 
you hit them.
     



      Note:
 If you are using any abilities that depend on the opponent’s evade, 
treat their Dexterity as evade. If the opponent chooses not to dodge the
 attack, assume their evade matches your accuracy.
     







      One-Handing It
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      You
 may wield two-handed weapons in one hand. Reloading a marksmanship 
weapon and using bows of any size still requires an additional free 
hand. For all purposes beyond how many hands the weapon requires, this 
specialty changes nothing.
     







      Robust Toss
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Cost: Medium (or larger) Thrown Attack
     



      Just
 because your opponent is out of reach doesn’t mean you can’t smash 
their face in. Whenever you use a medium or larger thrown weapon, you 
may deal extra damage with the attack. If it lands, roll your Overpower 
to determine its extra damage.
     



      2 additional damage
     



      4 additional damage
     



      6 additional damage
     



      8 additional damage
     







      Shield Whack
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Cost: Melee Attack conversion
     



      Most
 people use their shields for protection, keeping their shield in 
between your weapon and their flesh. That’s an advantage that you’ll 
use. Whenever an opponent attempts to use a shield to deflect one of 
your attacks, you may instantly convert the attack into a shield whack. 
Though you’ll deal no damage with the attack, you hit the victim’s 
shield so hard that it staggers them, causing them to lose their stance,
 and they are disoriented for their next turn.
     







      Solid Assault
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 ready your strike and bring it in smoothly to deal just the right 
amount of damage. If you successfully hit with your solid assault, you 
deal damage as though it were one tier higher.
     



      Stunning Blow
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Resist: Brute (tiers down)
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      With
 a well aimed strike, you stun your opponent. If the opponent fails to 
resist against your overpower and your receive a tier 2 result or 
higher, the target is stunned. The target may roll their Brute in order 
to resist. For every tier over Tier 1 that they receive, they lower the 
effect of Stunning Blow by one tier.
     



      No effect
     



      Stunned for 1 AP
     



      Stunned for 2 AP
     



      Stunned for 3 AP
     







      Titanic Strength
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Overpower
     



      You
 lift the heaviest of weapons and swing them around as though they were 
tiny fencing blades. You do not need to enter into a footing stance when
 you use super-heavy melee weapons.
     







      With Gusto
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Requires: +13 to Strike
     



      Resist: Brute (negates)
     



      When
 you attack with gusto, your attack is so powerful that no armor can 
stand against it. If your melee attack deals tier 4 damage (or greater),
 you negate all of your opponent’s damage soak from their armor unless 
they can make their resist against your overpower.
     











      p Armor-Breaking Specialties M
     



      Chipping Away
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity (tiers down)
     



      Cost: Heavy (or larger) Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      Your
 attacks wear on the opponent’s armor, slowly chipping it away until it 
falls apart. When you make a Chipping Away attack, you lower the soak 
class on the target’s armor by 1. The penalty can never send their soak 
class below zero, but chipping away does stack over time. If the armor’s
 soak class reaches 0, the armor is effectively destroyed (and any 
augments on it or bonuses that the target receives for wearing armor are
 negated). The opponent can negate the Chipping Away by making a 
Dexterity roll opposed by your Overpower roll.
     



      Note:
 Somebody with broken or damaged armor can patch it back together during
 a breather.
     







      Armor Sunder
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Requires: Chipping Away specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity (tiers down)
     



      Cost: Heavy (or larger) Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      The
 biggest obstacle between your sword and their heart is their armor, and
 you’re not beyond destroying that too. An armor sundering attack lowers
 the soak class on their armor. The penalty can never send their soak 
class below zero, but multiple armor sundering attacks can stack. If the
 armor’s soak class reaches 0, the armor is effectively destroyed (and 
any augments on it or bonuses that the target receives for wearing armor
 are negated).
     



      -2 soak class
     



      -3 soak class
     



      -4 soak class
     



      -5 soak class
     







      Note: Somebody with broken or damaged armor can patch it back together during a breather.
     











      p Earth-Shattering Specialties M
     



      Earthquaking Strike
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      Cost: As a Heavy (or larger) Melee Attack
     



      Rather
 than attacking the target, you attack the ground in front of the 
target, destroying the ground and destabilizing everyone around unless 
they can make a Cunning resist against your Overpower skill.
     



      The person standing in the area attacked is disoriented for one turn
     



      Everyone within 5 feet of the area attacked is disoriented for one turn
     



      Everyone within 5 feet of the area attacked is disoriented for two turns
     



      Everyone within 10 feet of the area attacked is disoriented for three turns
     







      Rampant Destruction
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Requires: Earthquaking Strike specialty
     



      Cost: Earthquaking Strike +1 AP
     



      With
 just a bit more effort, you can turn your Earthquaking Strike into 
rampant destruction. The effect of your Rampant Destruction is exactly 
the same, except this doesn’t just cause the ground around you to 
vibrate, it causes the ground to explode outward. Roll only once for the
 Earthquaking Strike as for the Rampant Destruction.
     



      In the area struck, the ground is destroyed one foot down.
     



      In the area effected, the ground is destroyed three feet down.
     



      In the area effected, the ground is destroyed ten feet down.
     



      In the area effected, the ground is destroyed twenty feet down.
     







      Note
 on Collapsing Structures: This is especially effective while standing 
on a bridge, on the second floor of a building, or while out on the 
streets with a sewer underneath. Remember, however, that if you are in 
the area of the rampant destruction’s effect, you too will fall down.
     











      p Push Away Specialties M
     



      Staggering Strike
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Resist: Brute (tiers down)
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      Throwing
 yourself completely into the attack, you toss your opponent into the 
air like a rag doll. You knock them back several feet and potentially 
prone. The target may roll their Brute in order to resist.
     



      5 feet
     



      10 feet
     



      10 feet and prone
     



      15 feet and prone
     







      Bullrush
     



      Overpower Specialty
     



      Requires: Staggering Strike specialty
     



      Cost: Move + Melee Attack
     



      When
 you charge at an opponent, you can throw them backwards. If you run 
toward an opponent in a straight line (for a minimum of 15 feet) and 
then make a melee attack, your melee attack is automatically a 
Staggering Strike.
     



      If
 you so choose, you may also move with the target (staying adjacent to 
them) for the distance that you send them from the Staggering Strike. 
This extra movement has no cost.
     
















      Resilience Skill
     



      Resilience
 is your ability to weather attacks, continue on, and protect your 
allies. A character with resilience can use their great strength to keep
 the good fight going and never stand down. Resilience makes a character
 almost impossible to take down, and so builds the perfect front-line 
fighter and person that you want between the enemy and the group’s 
travelling scientist.
     







      Blast Proof
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (tiers down)
     



      Cost: Shield Deflection +1 AP reflexively
     



      In
 the face of explosives, blasts, and storms, you raise your shield and 
carry on, shielding yourself and your allies from the blast. Whenever 
you are in the midst of an explosion or similar effect that has a blast 
area, you can negate the effect upon yourself and potentially adjacent 
spaces unless the originator of the effect resists against your skill in
 Resilience.
     



      Negates effect in your space
     



      Negates effect in your space & 1 space behind you
     



      Negates effect in your space & 2 spaces behind you
     



      Negates effect in your space & 4 spaces behind you
     







      Body of Steel
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Your
 armored training allows you to push past called shots. When an opponent
 attempts a called shot on you, you may add your defense to the resist 
against the called shot.
     







      Brace for Impact
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Cost: as a Shield Deflection
     



      Instead
 of attempting to evade the attack, you Brace for Impact. You may Brace 
for Impact at any time that you would normally be able to deflect a 
blow. Bracing for Impact converts your evade bonus for deflecting into a
 defense bonus instead.
     







      Bulwark
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 ready yourself for any attack, becoming an untouchable bulwark. While 
in this stance, roll twice for your defense rolls and take the higher 
result. You still add your defense bonus to the roll of your choice.
     







      Interposition
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates)
     



      Cost: Move +1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 are able to gauge an opponent’s intent to strike a friend, allowing you
 to Interpose yourself between them and one of your allies. You must 
decide to Interpose yourself before your ally rolls their evade. For the
 cost of a move +1 action point, you may make a single move to place 
yourself in front of the attack.
     



      If
 the attack is a melee one, you must end your move adjacent to both the 
ally being attacked and to the person making the attack.
     



      If
 the attack is a ranged one, you must end your move in-between your ally
 and the person making the attack.
     



      Furthermore,
 the person making the attack is allowed to resist against your 
resilience. If they successfully resist, the attack hits the intended 
target instead of you. If the resist fails, the attack automatically 
hits you.
     











      Metal Embrace
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Any
 time you are struck in combat, you may, for 1 action point, make a 
resilience roll, soaking an amount of additional damage as determined 
below.
     



      Soak 3 additional damage
     



      Soak 6 additional damage
     



      Soak 9 additional damage
     



      Soak 12 additional damage
     







      Never Off-Guard
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      You
 are always ready for an attack. Normally, your hit points go down after
 combat while you’re resting or socializing. Your hit points are always,
 at least partially, ready to go. When not in combat, you always have a 
number of hit points up equal to twice your skill in Resilience, even 
when you’re not conscious. Of course, you can’t have more hit points up 
than your maximum.
     







      Press
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates)
     



      You
 choose a target, and as long as you’re adjacent to that target, you can
 completely block him from attacking anybody but you. When you enter 
this stance, choose a target of the stance. To choose a different 
target, you must re-enter the stance. As long as you are adjacent to the
 target, if the target tries to attack anybody, they must succeed at the
 resist. If they fail, they do not attack and, instead, lose 1 action 
point.
     







      Protector
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Cost: as a Shield Deflection
     



      You
 may protect those around you using your shield. Any time an adjacent 
ally would be the target of an attack, you may use your shield to 
deflect the blow for them. The ally gains any bonuses that you would 
gain for your deflection.
     







      Resolute
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Requires: 2 or more stances known from the Resilience skill
     



      You
 are the ultimate sentinel, transforming yourself into an impregnable 
barrier. When you enter into one of your stances from the Resilience 
skill, you may simultaneously enter all of your known Resilience stances
 and keep all of them active (as long as they don’t negate each other 
for any reason). They all act as one stance, so if you get knocked out 
of your stance, you get knocked out of all of your stances.
     







      Second Skin
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Attacks
 which ignore damage soak still have trouble with you. Whenever you are 
subject to an attack that is going to ignore your damage soak, you may 
spend 1 action point to convert it into soakable damage.
     



      Up to 3 points of unsoakable damage made soakable.
     



      Up to 6 points of unsoakable damage made soakable.
     



      Up to 9 points of unsoakable damage made soakable.
     



      Up to 12 points of unsoakable damage made soakable.
     







      Solid Stances
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      You
 have great balance and you understand how to keep your posture. As long
 as you’re conscious, you cannot be voluntarily knocked out of your 
stance(s) from being pushed back or knocked prone.
     







      Thick Skin
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Your
 body naturally soaks some damage. Your body has a natural soak class of
 1. Furthermore, for every 5 skill points you have in Resilience, you 
have an additional soak class of 1. So, if you have a 20 in Resilience, 
you have would a soak class (without armor) of 5. This soak class stacks
 with armor.
     







      Tough Stuff
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      You
 gain bonus hit points depending on your skill in Resilience and how 
many specialties you have. For every specialty you have (including this 
one), you gain 1 extra hit point. For every 8 skill points you have in 
Resilience, that number increases by 1. Thus, if you have 8 skill points
 in Resilience and 6 specialties, you would have 12 extra hit points.
     







      Unassailable Mountain
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Requires: you to be wearing heavy (or heavier) armor
     



      Cost: 3 AP reflexively
     



      For
 3 action points, you may greatly increase your damage soak. This can be
 decided after the damage has been announced. If the attack was a 
special attack, any other effects from the attack still apply. This 
ability only works while in heavy (or heavier) armor. To determine how 
much your soak class increases, roll below:
     



      +4 soak class
     



      +5 soak class
     



      +6 soak class
     



      +7 soak class
     







      Walking Fortress
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Resilience
     



      While
 in the Walking Fortress stance, your defense skyrockets. You gain a +1 
to your defense for every 3 skill points you have in resilience.
     







      Ward
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 won’t allow your foes to pass by you unscathed. When an opponent moves 
into your melee range, you can make a reflexive attack against them for 1
 action point. If an opponent moves from one space within melee range to
 another space within melee range, this also leaves them open to your 
reflexive attacks. A single opponent can only be the target of this 
specialty once per turn.
     











      p Armored Movement Specialties M
     



      Armored Ease
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      When
 you are wearing armor, you may consider it one degree lighter at your 
discretion. Therefore, you can treat your medium armor as light armor 
for determining penalties but still gain all of the benefits of wearing 
medium armor.
     







      Armored Freedom
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Requires: Armored Ease specialty & 7 skill points in Resilience
     



      Now,
 while wearing armor, you may consider it two degrees lighter for 
determining penalties (in addition to the one degree gained from Armored
 Ease). Thus, you could be wearing super-heavy armor, but only have the 
penalties of light armor.
     











      p Barrier Specialties M
     



      Living Barrier
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates)
     



      Nothing
 bypasses you. When you enter your living barrier stance, you 
strategically place yourself so that you take up three adjacent spaces 
(as in, your normal space plus two more) and you may attack anything 
adjacent to your new size.
     



      Opponents
 attempting to move through your new space must make a Dexterity resist 
against your resilience. If the opponent fails, they may not enter your 
new space and their movement is stopped.
     







      Living Wall
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Requires: Living Barrier specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates)
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      While
 in living barrier stance, if an opponent attempts to attack someone 
through you or inside your newly expanded space, you may spend 1 
reflexive action point to intercept this attack. In doing so, you 
receive no evade roll (acting as if the evade roll was a 1) and are hit 
with the attack. The opponent may roll a Dexterity resist against your 
Resilience still in order to attempt to attack his original target.
     







      Living Stronghold
     



      Resilience Specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity
     



      Requires: Living Barrier & Living Wall specialties
     



      Nothing
 bypasses you. While in living barrier stance, if an opponent attempts 
to target somebody through you or inside your expanded space and fails 
their Dexterity resist against you, the attack is negated. They lose all
 of the action points spent to make the attack.
     












      Chapter 7 - Cunning
     



      Knowledge
 is power, and using it to your advantage can move worlds. At its most 
basic level, cunning is the ability to process and retain information. 
As you grow, you can train yourself to be more keen, see into things 
that other people would quickly disregard, and learn the skills to 
survive no matter where you go. The attribute of Cunning also increases 
you ability to see the whole picture and interact with others.
     







      What can you do with your Cunning attribute?
     











      Gather Intel
     



      Memory
 and research can be very valuable tools for finding information. 
Intelligence can be found through talking to the right people, reading, 
or simply having heard about it in the past. To determine if you know 
the information, roll your Cunning and tier the result. The narrator 
will then tell you the appropriate amount of information you know.
     



      Tier
 1 You know nothing more than common knowledge, such as the name of a 
road or the king’s name.
     



      Tier
 2 You’ve heard some tidbits, a smidge of esoteric knowledge, like the 
year an old temple was built or the nickname for the local baron’s 
favorite hunting dog.
     



      Tier
 3 You know rather obscure information, such as where the merchant lord 
of a large shipping company buys his illegal firearms from or how a 
famous doctor prevents people from bleeding during his surgeries.
     



      Tier
 4 You know the rarest of information, from the coordinates of the tree a
 bartender in the next town over shared his first kiss under, to the 
secret meaning behind the king’s royal title.
     







      Research
 and intelligence gathering can allow you to roll again, and potentially
 with bonuses. If you’ve spent quite a bit of time in a library, looking
 up the reasons behind the current plague, you may roll again. In 
addition, the advanced medical section in the library may grant you a +3
 on the roll. Likewise, if the local librarian who you’ve been talking 
to also has some knowledge of the plague, that +3 might jump up to a +6 
on the roll.
     







      Lockpicking
     



      Attempt Cost: 3 AP
     



      The
 gunfire makes it hard to concentrate. Your friends have your back, 
picking off the ravenous arachnid automatons while you have your toolset
 in your hand, trying desperately to get through this lock. There’s too 
many of them to fight off. If you can’t get this done before the full 
swarm arrives, you’re all dead.
     



      Trying
 to pick a lock costs 3 action points, just to get into position and 
starts the process. After that, you’re going to roll Cunning. For any 
given lock, you may only roll once. The tier that you receive will tell 
you how well you pick the lock.
     



      Tier
 1 Requires several minutes and is not something that can be done during
 combat
     



      Tier 2 Requires 9 more action points
     



      Tier 3 Requires 3 more action points
     



      Tier 4 You got it on the first try.
     







      Difficulty
 of Locks: The basic door lock will rarely hamper a person truly trying 
to open the lock. However, advanced locks will decrease your tier 
result. For example, a solid, well-built lock might lower the 
lockpicker’s result by 1 tier. The duke’s custom-made and advanced 
locking mechanism might lower the lockpicker’s tier by 3. If the 
lockpicking roll is brought below tier 1, it simply cannot be 
accomplished (unless mitigating factors might allow it - and the 
narrator might even say, “It seems possible, but will require several 
hours of focus”).
     



      A
 lock that lowers the result by 4 tiers should probably not even exist, 
as the lock is virtually unpickable.
     







      Notice
     



      Notice
 is an immensely useful little trait, from noticing that the building is
 on fire to noticing that the king is wearing the wrong ring. Notice 
comes in two categories: noticing people and noticing objects. If you 
are looking for a person, you would roll your Cunning against their 
Cunning (if they’re hiding) or their Dexterity (if they’re sneaking). If
 you are attempting to notice an object, you would roll your Cunning and
 tier the result to see if you can notice it.
     



      Tier 1 You can only notice readily visible items.
     



      Tier 2 You notice items that are partially hidden.
     



      Tier
 3 You notice items that are almost entirely hidden, or something else 
is betraying their whereabouts.
     



      Tier
 4 You notice items that nobody else would, like a faint outline under a
 curtain or that the airflow in the room is slightly off.
     
















      Espionage Skill
     



      Let’s
 face it: you just want to stab people when nobody’s looking. It may be 
due to personal, unresolved social problems. It could be an emotional 
dependency on other people’s pain. Or maybe you just like delivering 
surprises. Regardless, you take people off-guard, play with them in a 
fight, and then trash them them like a rotting corpse in a trench. In 
fact, that’s exactly what they are.
     







      Destabilizing Strike
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Cost: Attack +1 AP
     



      When
 your opponent is disoriented, you take advantage of their weakened mind
 and can make a Destabilizing Strike. A Destabilizing Strike, if it 
deals damage, causes the opponent to become open to a reflexive attack 
from every character within melee range of the target. These reflexive 
attacks can be made either as unarmed attacks or by using super-heavy or
 smaller melee weapons, which will only cost 1 action point to perform 
instead of the normal 2. As the person who made the destabilizing 
strike, you cannot make a reflexive attack.
     







      Feign Fatal Wounds
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      When
 you’re struck in combat, you can overplay the success of the attack, 
making your enemy think you’ve been taken out of the battle or seriously
 injured. When damage is dealt to you, you may spend 1 action point 
reflexively in order to trick the opponent into thinking that they have 
wounded, dealt you a fatal attack, or outright killed you. They may 
resist with a successful Cunning roll (opposed by your espionage roll). 
If they fail, you may choose to what degree you appear to have been 
injured (or falling down and feigning death entirely).
     



      Do
 note that if you fall down as a result of feigning death or a serious 
wound, standing up costs an action point.
     







      First Strike
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      You
 make it your business knowing that you’re in a fight before your 
enemies do. If you make the first strike of a combat - either before 
priority is rolled or by being the first person to act in the combat - 
your attack gains a bonus on your accuracy roll equal to your skill in 
Espionage.
     



      Flowing Shadow
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Espionage
     



      You
 flow within the shadows, keeping your opponents guessing as you weave 
and dart through the darkness. Any time the person attacking you is 
blinded or in poor lighting, you can roll your evade two times and take 
the higher result. In addition, you gain a +1 on your evade rolls per 4 
skill points you have in Espionage while in darkness. If the opponent 
attacking you in unaffected by darkness or relies on a way of finding 
you that is not based on sight, you do not gain the evade bonus or the 
ability to roll twice and take the higher result.
     







      Heartseeker
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Cost: Melee Attack with a Light Weapon +1 AP
     



      When
 wielding a light weapon, you know the best way to get through your 
enemy’s pesky armor. When you make a Heartseeking attack, your opponent 
has more difficulty soaking it. For the purposes of this attack, lower 
your opponent’s soak class by 1 for every tier that you receive with 
your Espionage roll. This does not permanently affect the armor.
     



      -1 soak class
     



      -2 soak class
     



      -3 soak class
     



      -4 soak class
     







      Invisible Blade
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 fight with your weapons palmed, keeping your attacks so tight that your
 blades are little more than an extension of your fists. When using a 
weapon that is both light and concealable, you fight as if unarmed: you 
cannot be disarmed or have your weapon sundered, and your attacks only 
cost 1 action point to make. For all other purposes, your weapon still 
counts as a light weapon.
     







      Master Lockpick
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Doors
 are of little bother to you; your skill in lockpicking turns solid 
barriers into tiny inconveniences. This specialty improves your ability 
to understand a lock and pick it. When you begin picking a lock, roll 
for your Master Lockpick to further reduce the action points that you’ll
 need in order to pick the lock. The AP cost of the lock can never drop 
below marque I.
     



      No luck. Your normal Cunning will have to deal with the lock.
     



      You
 can kind of see it. The marque of the lock is reduced by 1 for the 
purpose of this lockpicking.
     



      It’s
 an average challenge. The marque of the lock is reduced by 2 for the 
purpose of this lockpicking.
     



      Aha!
 The marque of the lock is reduced by 3 for the purpose of this 
lockpicking.
     







      Pierce the Darkness
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Espionage
     



      You
 launch your attack from the victim’s blindspot, ensuring your success. 
When you are attacking from perfect darkness, poor lighting, fog, or 
anything else that hampers vision, you gain a +1 on your accuracy roll 
for every 4 skill points you have in Espionage. If the opponent has some
 way of seeing through the poor visibility you’re hiding in, you do not 
gain the bonus.
     







      Silent Kill
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (see below)
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      When
 you attack somebody, you may attempt to make the attack absolutely 
silent. This is normally done when going for a killing blow that the 
target is unaware of, in order to not get caught in the act.
     



      You
 may be stifling their scream or trying to make your blade not chink 
against their armor. If the target does not try to make a noise, you 
simply roll your skill in espionage against anybody listening.
     



      If,
 however, the target screams, yells out, or calls for help, you must 
attempt to cover their mouth or stab them in the throat: anything to 
keep the sound from carrying. If this happens, anybody listening can 
attempt a Cunning resist to hear the cry.
     







      Sinister Strike
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Requires: 18 skill points in Espionage
     



      Cost: Reflexive Melee Strike +3 AP
     



      Your
 ally has created an opening, and it’s time to go in for the kill. After
 an ally hits an adjacent opponent, you can reflexively make a sinister 
strike. This attack deals damage directly to wounds. If it exhausts the 
target’s wounds, they suffer a fatal effect.
     







      p Nightwalker Specialties M
     



      Fighting Blind
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      You take no penalty for melee fighting while in poor lighting or in absolute darkness.
     



      If
 you do not know where your opponent is, this specialty does not give 
you a way of locating them, and this Fighting Blind does not negate the 
ranged penalty for blindness.
     







      Deep Blind Senses
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Requires: Fighting Blind specialty & 5 skill points in Espionage
     



      Your
 hearing, sense of the air vibration, or ability to locate your 
opponents in the deepest of darknesses allows you to fire accurately 
upon distant targets even when blind. You may use ranged attacks against
 opponents at no penalty when blind or in poor lighting up to 5 feet 
away per skill point you have in Espionage.
     











      p Cover User Specialties M
     



      Cover Expert
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You’re
 well practiced at taking advantage of whatever cover is available. 
While you are in this stance, any cover that you take is treated as 
though it were one level greater. If you exceed heavy cover, you cannot 
be targeted by a ranged attack.
     







      Contort
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Requires: Cover Expert specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Small
 barriers can fully eclipse your body as you contort yourself to fit 
behind them. While in your Cover Expert stance and behind cover, you may
 contort yourself so that the cover becomes complete cover, and you 
cannot be targeted by ranged attacks while behind it. You may leave your
 cover for no action point cost.
     



      Additionally,
 when you are in a hiding spot but somebody is actively searching that 
spot, they do not automatically find you. Instead, they must still roll 
their Cunning to notice you. If they fail the roll, they do not notice 
you, even though they were searching your exact area.
     



      p Critical Specialties M
     



      Critical Hits
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Light
 weapons, while normally less damaging than other weapons, do seem to 
have a knack for finding soft spots in a target’s defense. When you 
attack with a light weapon in melee, for every 5 points that your 
accuracy roll exceeds your target’s evade roll, your attack’s damage 
class increases by 1. This extra damage class cannot exceed your skill 
in espionage.
     



      Thus,
 if your opponent rolled a 2 on their evade and you rolled a 12, your 
attack’s damage class would be 2 higher than normal.
     



      Hairsplitter
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Requires: Critical Hits specialty & +6 Accuracy (from specialties)
     



      Your
 precision and accuracy is not to be out done. When you are making a 
melee attack with a light weapon, you gain an additional damage class 
for every 3 points that your accuracy roll exceeds your target’s evade 
roll. This bonus replaces your bonus from your Critical Hits specialty. 
This extra damage class cannot exceed your skill in espionage.
     







      Pinpoint Shot
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Requires: Either the Critical Hits or Heartseeker specialty
     



      You’re
 just as accurate from a range as you are when you’re standing right 
next to your victim. You may use any specialty that calls for a melee 
attack with a light weapon when using a light ranged weapon.
     







      p Dirt in the Eyes Specialties M
     



      Dirt in the Eyes
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Throwing
 dirt, blood, water, and other foul substances is an art that has been 
perfected by dirty fighters for centuries. It’s perfect for catching 
people off-guard and momentarily blinding them. If you’d like to throw 
dirt in somebody’s eyes, they must be adjacent to you, and you must 
succeed at making an accuracy roll against their evade roll. (For all 
intents and purposes, this is similar to a called shot against the 
head.) If they have anything protecting their eyes, such as goggles, the
 target gains a +3 on their evade roll. If you’re successful, the 
opponent suffers a penalty to their next evade roll equal to your skill 
in Espionage.
     



      The
 target may, if he so chooses, spend 1 action point to rub the substance
 out before taking the penalty on his next evade.
     







      Blind & Swing
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Requires: Dirt in the Eyes specialty
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 may combine your Dirt in the Eyes attack with a melee attack, more 
efficiently catching your foes in their crucial moment of weakness. For 
the cost of a melee attack +1 action point, you may throw dirt in your 
opponent’s eye and make a melee attack. You resolve your Dirt in the 
Eyes attack first (which, if successful, gives them a large penalty on 
their evade roll) and then your attack second.
     











      p Disorienting Specialties M
     



      Distracting Attack
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (tiers down)
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      Your
 attacks bewilder and confuse your opponent. You can make a melee attack
 that, if successful, disorients the target (causing them to lose 1 
action point per turn) for a handful of turns.
     



      1 turn
     



      2 turns
     



      3 turns
     



      4 turns
     







      Taking Advantage
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Requires: Distracting Attack specialty
     



      When
 your opponent is disoriented, you know all the tricks for taking 
advantage of their momentary weakness. When fighting somebody who is 
disoriented, it does not cost you the extra action point in order to 
make called shots against the person.
     







      Brain-Blowing Attack
     



      Espionage Specialty
     



      Requires: 12 skill points in Espionage & Distracting Attack specialty
     



      Your
 distracting attacks land beautifully, leaving the target fully 
disoriented for a considerably longer period of time. Whenever you make a
 distracting attack, you disorient them for twice as long as usual.
     












      Expertise Skill
     



      Your
 intelligence stems beyond book smarts into the realm of practical use. 
Your keen observations coupled with raw brainpower and experience have 
given you the skills you use on a daily basis. You are a thinker, 
combining thought with action. Whether it be determining the exact 
distance of an enemy force or doctoring the wounded, expertise gives you
 the know-how to do what needs to be done.
     







      Appraisal
     



      Expertise specialty
     



      You’ve
 got a keen eye for exactly how much something is worth. Though you can 
figure out the price of most items by looking to the Trust, your skill 
lies in figuring out the price for ancient prized relics, valuable 
gemstones, and precious works of art. You may only appraise an item once
 per downtime.
     



      You are able to determine the going market value of an item within 10%.
     



      You are able to determine the market value of an item, almost to the duke.
     



      Not
 only can you pinpoint the market value for an item, you can decipher 
any history or lore about it.
     



      You
 have a knack for knowing the exact price for an item, obscure 
information about it, and whether it contains any ancient secrets or 
certain people are searching for it
     







      Concentrated Focus
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Expertise
     



      Your
 concentration is so intense that it is difficult to stun you. When 
making a resist against being stunned, you may add your expertise onto 
the resist. (If the resist is a Cunning roll, add your expertise in 
addition to the Cunning total.)
     







      Deep Breath
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Requires: 5 skill points in Expertise
     



      Taking
 one deep breath, you look around the battlefield, analyzing your 
environment. As you exhale, time itself grinds to a halt. You receive 1 
extra action point when your action points refresh. You may only perform
 this once per turn. (Simply put, this specialty lets you spend 1 action
 point in order to gain an extra action point on your next turn, 
exceeding your normal maximum pool.)
     







      Demoman
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Expertise
     



      You
 don’t know how they work, but you sure know how to blow them up! For 
every 3 skill points you have in expertise, you gain a +1 damage class 
when attacking automatons and vehicles. This applies to anything you use
 that has a damage class, including explosives.
     







      Efficiency Expert
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Expertise
     



      When
 you or your friends are crafting items, you’re key to ensuring that no 
funds are wasted, that no screw is left behind. Not only does your DIY 
(do-it-yourself) score increase (based on the bonuses granted by this 
specialty), you improve your allies’ DIY score. When you spend your 
downtime with your fellow adventurers working on equipment, their DIY 
score becomes 3 points higher. This bonus cannot increase their 
effective DIY score beyond 12.
     



      If
 you have multiple efficiency experts, the bonus do not stack. Instead, 
for every additional efficiency expert you have in your party, you gain 
an additional +1 DIY.
     







      Fire Fighter
     



      Expertise specialty
     



      You
 must’ve had a pyromaniac as a friend growing up - you’re able to make 
battling back blazing infernos seem like child’s play. If you are 
putting out fires, you gain 2 extra action points per turn for putting 
out fires. You cannot catch on fire when extinguishing a fire on another
 creature.
     







      Hurl
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      You
 can throw just about anything. Even if an item or weapon is not 
classified as a throwing weapon, you may throw it as if it were. You do 
not take penalties for impromptu weapons, and it can go the distance it 
would go for its size categories (light: 25 feet; medium: 75 feet; and, 
heavy: 50 feet).
     







      Improv Fighter
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Expertise
     



      You’re
 a master of picking up whatever is nearby and using it to its most 
destructive potential. Barstool, glass, painting, or ladder, you’ve 
killed with them all. When using an impromptu weapon, your penalties are
 eliminated. When fighting with such unconventional melee objects, you 
gain a +1 to accuracy for every 3 points in expertise you have because 
opponents never expect you to be so talented with them.
     







      Mechanic
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      Though
 you may not be the original inventor, you have a knack for seeing 
problems and figuring out how to fix them. You may repair an adjacent 
automaton, vehicle, or any mechanical contraption with wounds or hit 
points.
     



      repairs 6 wounds or hit points
     



      repairs 12 wounds or hit points
     



      repairs 18 wounds or hit points
     



      repairs 24 wounds or hit points
     







      Patch the Bleeding
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      You’ve
 dealt with enough wounds to know how to make them stop bleeding very 
quickly. You can spend 1 action point to stop 10 bleeding damage (as 
opposed to the normal 5). In addition, if somebody is bleeding out (such
 as from losing a limb), for every 1 action point you spend it counts as
 3 action points for the purposes of preventing bleeding out.
     







      Observance
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      You
 watch the enemy closely, learning his movements and predicting his 
actions. Once you have “observed” somebody (an act that takes 2 action 
points), the next attack they make on you is converted into a normal 
attack unless they can make the resist against your Expertise. If they 
had applied any specialties to the attack or were making a called shot, 
all of these additions are negated. They still expend however many 
action points they would have, however.
     



      For
 example, an opponent is about to deliver an attack with a heavy weapon 
(2 AP), but they upgrade it to a solid strike (+1 AP) and called shot to
 the head (+1 AP). If they’ve been observed, their solid attack to the 
head becomes a regular attack with their heavy weapon, but still costs 
the 4 action points they would have used. If the observed opponent made a
 normal attack with their heavy weapon as their next attack, the 
observation would be wasted.
     







      Weak Point
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      After
 carefully studying your enemy, you are able to locate its weak point 
and exploit it. You may spend 2 action points studying a single foe, 
attempting to locate a weakness.
     



      You are able to detect any specific weaknesses to called shots the enemy has.
     



      You
 are able to determine what called shots the opponent would have the 
most trouble resisting or called shot weaknesses it has.
     



      You
 are able to determine any called shot weaknesses it has, which called 
shots it would have the most trouble resisting, and, when striking a 
called shot weakness, the effect of the called shot is doubled.
     



      You
 are able to determine any called shot weaknesses it has, which called 
shots it would have the most trouble resisting, and when striking a 
called shot weakness, the effect of the called shot is doubled. 
Furthermore, you are able to determine an immortal creature’s death 
trigger.
     







      Trick Counter
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      Cost: 1 (or more) AP reflexively
     



      Your
 enemies think they are upgrading their attacks and coming at you with 
unique tricks. You see through them. Whenever you are being attacked 
with a specialized attack or called shot (one that would have a cost of 
attack +1 AP, or attack +2 AP, et cetera), you may spend an equal amount
 of action points to the upgrade in order to attempt to negate it. The 
opponent could then resist with a Cunning roll against your expertise. 
If they fail, their attack is converted to normal, though the opponent 
still spends the same amount of action points.
     



      For
 example, if you are being attacked by a solid strike (attack +1 AP), 
you can spend 1 action point in order to attempt to make it a normal 
attack. If they have added multiple specialties on to the attack, you 
can choose to negate just a portion of it, or negate all specialties, 
and the opponent resists against losing each specialty separately.
     











      p Anti-Poison Specialties M
     



      Poison Finder
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Any
 time a poison comes within 10 feet of you, you may automatically roll 
your cunning to perceive it (unless you are not conscious or otherwise 
have your senses dulled), and you add your skill in expertise to the 
roll.
     







      Remove Poison
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      You
 have a knack for drawing poison out of a victim. Any time that you or 
an adjacent ally has been poisoned, you may attempt to remove it. If the
 poison has not activated yet, you can attempt to remove all effects. If
 it has activated, however, you can only remove lingering effects. Thus,
 if the poison dealt damage upon activation, you would have to remove 
the poison prior to activation in order to prevent the damage from being
 dealt.
     



      When
 you remove poison, you are able to negate effects. Once you attempt to 
remove the poison, you’re able to see what effects the poison is going 
to have.
     



      remove 1 effect
     



      remove 2 effects
     



      remove 3 effects
     



      remove 4 effects
     







      Note:
 Poisons that have the same augment multiple times in order to increase 
the potency of that augment only count as one effect.
     







      p Combat Insights Specialties M
     



      Combat Insights
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      While
 others are forced to rely on their brute strength or reflexes to avoid 
called shots, you see them all coming and react accordingly. You may use
 your cunning for all called shot resists instead of the normal 
attribute.
     







      Combat Analytics
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Requires: 11 skill points in Expertise & Combat Insight specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You’ve
 been in combat enough times that nothing surprises you anymore. Gone 
are the days of relying on Brute, Dexterity, or Spirit. Whenever a 
resist is required of you during combat, you may always use your Cunning
 by spending 1 action point.
     







      p Item Appropriation Specialties M
     



      Weapon Appropriations
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Though
 you might not have an armsmith handy, your knack for bargaining and 
making contacts allows you to get some higher quality weapons than 
normal. You may add a single weapon augment on to your weapon of choice 
(be it firearm, crossbow, melee weapon, throwing weapon, or bow). The 
augment must take up a single slot. The augment begins at marque 1, but 
increases by marque as though your expertise was determining its marque.
 (Thus, at 5 skill points in Expertise, you’ll have a marque II augment,
 15 skill points will give you a marque III, and 25 skill points a 
marque IV.)
     



      You
 may only have one such augment on a weapon that you carry, though you 
may select a different augment during every downtime that you have. (The
 downtime must occur in a location that has commerce and trade, 
otherwise you wouldn’t be able to procure the augment.) If the augment 
does not have a marque, you cannot appropriate it until you reach the 
equivalent cost for the augment.
     







      Quality Weapon
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Requires: Weapon Appropriations specialty
     



      You’re
 quite good at getting handouts. Your appropriated weapon gains an 
additional augment (of the same marque). Once you reach 10 skill points 
in Expertise, you gain a third augment on the weapon. All augments must 
be on the same weapon.
     







      p Surgery Specialties M
     



      Field Surgeon
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Expertise
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      The
 field surgeon patches up major wounds to decrease their allied 
mortality rate throughout the battlefield. You are that surgeon. You can
 restore wounds damage, but once you make your attempt, you cannot 
restore any more wounds damage on a person unless they take more damage 
to their wounds. Furthermore, you cannot restore more wounds damage than
 they’ve taken from their most recent attack. Thus, if somebody cut your
 ally for 3 wounds damage, you could not heal 4 of their wounds.
     



      The
 patient must spend 3 action points reflexively in order to be treated. 
The patient can do this over multiple turns, pulling action points from 
their next turn if need be. If you are engaged with a melee attacker, 
this leaves both you and the patient open to reflexive attacks (which 
they can make for the normal cost of their attack).
     



      restores 1 wound
     



      restores 2 wounds
     



      restores 3 wounds
     



      restores 4 wounds
     







      First Aid
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Requires: Field Surgeon specialty
     



      Cost: Move + Field Surgeon reflexively
     



      When
 somebody near you takes damage, you’re able to leap to the rescue and 
help them out. When somebody has taken wounds damage that is within one 
move’s distance of you, you may reflexively move to them and heal them 
using your Field Surgeon specialties.
     







      Self-Surgery
     



      Expertise Specialty
     



      Requires: Field Surgeon specialty
     



      Though
 its difficulty is beyond most people, you’re able to grit through 
self-surgery. You may now use Field Surgeon on yourself.
     












      Showmanship Skill
     



      You
 are a performer, the master of showmanship, the troubadour of the 
world, the man who was born on a stage. You control people’s emotions 
through your performances, stopping people dead in their tracks with 
your bravado and encouraging them to do impossible feats through your 
inspiration. The person with a knack in showmanship is going to be 
useful no matter where they go, and their allies will never regret 
having a performer around.
     







      Blindside
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      Large
 hand gestures and loud noises keep your opponent focused in a direction
 of your choosing, allowing you to make them blind to everything in the 
opposite direction. The target must be within 25 feet of you. The 
opponent acts blind and deaf toward anything from that direction until 
something attacks them from that direction, at which time your Blindside
 is cancelled and must be restarted. You may have blindside activated on
 multiple people at once, but a single opponent can only be the target 
of one blindside.
     







      Captive Audience
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      Once
 you’ve got someone close to you, you never let them go. When entering 
this stance, choose a single adjacent target. You cannot move away from 
the target, but you also prevent the target from moving away from you 
unless they resist. They can attempt to resist immediately when you 
enter the stance, and then at the end of their turn, when their action 
points refresh. If they successfully resist, you exit your stance.
     







      Catchphrase
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      You
 reveal your hidden catchphrase and jump into your next action. Saying 
your catchphrase requires 1 action point, but the next time you roll a 
tier result for a specialty, you use your showmanship skill in place of 
the skill the specialty normally requires.
     







      Chime In
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: 2 skill points in Showmanship
     



      By
 adding in little snippets of information to help an argument, you add a
 bonus to another player’s cunning roll whenever they are attempting 
diplomacy, bluff, or any social interaction. The bonus is a +1 for every
 2 skill points you have in showmanship.
     







      Conveyor
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 can duplicate effects that you see, extending an ally’s buffing range. 
When an ally creates an effect that affects all allies within a certain 
range, you can spend 1 action point reflexively in order to also affect 
all allies within the same range of you.
     







      Deafening Roar
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Resist: Brute (tiers down)
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      You
 choose one adjacent opponent and roar so loudly in his ear that his 
eardrum bursts. The opponent is deafened (suffering a -2 to evade) for a
 number of turns.
     



      1 turns
     



      2 turns
     



      3 turns
     



      4 turns
     







      Distract
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      Sometimes
 you’re right in front of them. Other times, they’re not so sure. You 
can distract an opponent during their turn, momentarily thinking that 
you’re somewhere else. Whenever an opponent takes an action against you,
 you may attempt to distract them. Choose another location within 10 
feet to create your distraction. If the opponent fails their Cunning 
resist against your showmanship, they - for the purpose of this one 
action - believe that you are in the location where you caused the 
distraction. If there is something else there (like a wall or a person),
 they gain a +10 on the resist.
     







      Jester
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (tiers down)
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      You
 can throw your voice, yell, or dance to bewilder opponents. On-looking 
opponents within 25 feet may become disoriented simply from laughing at 
you. Jester can affect multiple people, and all affected may attempt to 
resist. For every tier that they receive above tier 1, they decrease the
 amount of turns they are disoriented by 1.
     



      1 target is disoriented for 1 turn
     



      2 targets are disoriented for 2 turns
     



      3 targets are disoriented for 3 turns
     



      4 targets are disoriented for 4 turns
     







      Marionette Strings
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 guide the attack of a nearby ally, ensuring their success. Any time an 
ally makes an attack within 25 feet, you may use your marionette strings
 to give them a bonus on their accuracy. This can be decided even after 
the roll has been made.
     



      +2 on their accuracy roll
     



      +4 on their accuracy roll
     



      +6 on their accuracy roll
     



      +8 on their accuracy roll
     







      Praise
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 sing the praises of your fellow adventurers. You may spend 1 action 
point reflexively to allow a party member to re-roll any resist, as long
 as they can hear you. You can only do this once per resist.
     



      Sleight of Hand
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      When
 you use an item, one second it’s there, the next it’s gone. Your 
opponents won’t be able to take advantage of you while you use items. 
Activating and using items does not leave you open to reflexive attacks.
     







      Smoke & Mirrors
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Showmanship
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates)
     



      Cost: 3 AP reflexively
     



      With
 the flick of your wrist, you can make an ally within 25 feet appear in 
one location when they thought they were elsewhere. When an ally has 
failed an evade roll, you may reflexively move your ally to an adjacent 
space. The assailant may resist against your showmanship with their 
Dexterity. If you succeed, your ally may immediately move to an adjacent
 space, and the assailant’s attack automatically misses.
     







      Throw Off Balance
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (tiers down)
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Just
 as a melee attack hits one of your allies within 25 feet, you distract 
the opponent and cause them to do minimal damage. The attacker must roll
 their strike multiple times and take the lowest roll, but they can use 
their Cunning resist in order to lower the result.
     



      The attacker rolls two times and takes the lowest
     



      The attacker rolls three times and takes the lowest
     



      The attacker rolls four times and takes the lowest
     



      The attacker rolls five times and takes the lowest
     







      Unmarred Perfection
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Resist: Cunning or Spirit (negates)
     



      Opponents
 regret attacking you, for fear of harming your perfect image. While in 
this stance, anybody that attempts to attack you in melee must resist or
 suffer a penalty to their accuracy equal to your skill in Showmanship. 
However, while in this stance, you can make only graceful and 
non-alarming moves, and thus must roll all strike rolls twice and take 
the lower result.
     











      p Choreographed Specialties M
     



      Epic Dance
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      You
 bust out your best dance moves, chaining them together in a beautifully
 unpredictable fashion. While dancing your epic dance, you gain a +3 to 
evade. You gain an additional point of evade for every 5 skill points 
you have in Showmanship. You can only have one epic dance going at any 
given time.
     



      If tripped, your Epic Dance is cancelled and must be restarted.
     







      Never Stop the Dance
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: Epic Dance specialty
     



      While
 performing your epic dance, you use your choreography to  block 
and brace your body against incoming blows. You gain an identical bonus 
to your defense in addition to the evade bonus you receive from your 
epic dance.
     







      p Epic Music Specialties M
     



      Battle Theme
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      Don’t
 worry, you’ve got this. The epic music in the air says that you can’t 
fail. While performing your battle theme, you gain a +3 to accuracy 
rolls. You gain an additional point of accuracy for every 5 skill points
 you have in showmanship. You can only be singing one battle theme at 
any given time.
     



      If
 you are singing, a successful called shot to your neck will cancel your
 battle theme. Alternatively, if you are using a musical instrument, a 
successful sunder or disarm will also cancel your battle theme.
     







      Heavenly Serenade
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: Battle Theme specialty
     



      Resist: Spirit (negates)
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      Your
 Battle Theme is so beautiful that it digs deep into people’s souls and 
prevents them from acting. While performing your Battle Theme, any time 
anybody within 25 feet wants to make an action, you can reflexively 
spend 2 action points to make them roll a resist against your 
Showmanship in order to take that action. If they fail the resist, they 
instead lose 1 action point.
     







      Spotlight
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: Battle Theme specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 point to an ally within 25 feet, signaling to them that it’s their time
 to shine. While performing your Battle Theme, you may spend 1 action 
point reflexively to grant your Battle Theme accuracy bonus to an ally’s
 accuracy, evade, strike, or defense roll.
     







      Unified Chorus
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: Battle Theme specialty & 16 skill points in Showmanship
     



      Your
 beautiful song causes your allies to lend you their voices! Any bonuses
 to accuracy or strike you gain from your Battle Theme now apply to all 
allies within 25 feet of you. If multiple allies have this specialty, 
everyone only receives bonuses from the one with the highest amount of 
skill points in Showmanship.
     







      Victory Theme
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: Battle Theme specialty
     



      You
 begin to weave a power ballad which drives you forward; your music 
crying for the utter destruction of your foes. Any bonus to accuracy you
 receive from your battle theme also acts as a bonus to your strike.
     







      p Smokescreen Specialties M
     



      Smokescreen
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      When
 you need to, you’ve always got a way to throw enemies off for just a 
second or two. You may toss down a Smokescreen during your turn that 
lasts until the end of your turn (when your action points refresh). This
 Smokescreen only envelopes you, but it hides all of your actions while 
in the Smokescreen. If you move, the Smokescreen does not move with you 
and instead disperses.
     







      Walking Darkness
     



      Showmanship Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Requires: Smokescreen specialty
     



      More
 than a simple disappearing act, you walk across the battlefield 
shrouded by a magician’s smoke cloud. While in this stance, you gain a 
+4 to evade and all of your actions are considered hidden. If an 
opponent has some way of knowing where you are that does not rely on 
sight or can see through perfect darkness, you do not gain the bonus to 
evade against them.
     












      Tactical Skill
     



      Tactical
 is the skill of battlefield commanders, great generals, and military 
leaders. As your party’s tactician, you’re going to keep people safe by 
making timely decisions to affect the overall flow of the battlefield. 
The enemies are your pawns, and you move everyone with equal ease. 
Tactical is about knowing your enemy, focusing your best attacks, and 
using all of your best advantages to drive your pike into their 
disadvantages.
     







      Ally of the Machine
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Requires: 6 skill points in Automata
     



      Using
 your keen sense of machinery and the way automatons function, you can 
now treat automatons as your allies. When using a specialty that allows 
you to affect your allies, automatons may now act as allies.
     







      Armistice
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      Sometimes
 the best part of a battle is when you’re not fighting in it. When you 
enter your armistice stance, opponents who attack you are stunned for 1 
action point unless they resist against your Tactical. However, you must
 exit your Armistice stance (for 0 action points) before attacking, else
 you will be stunned for 2 action points.
     







      Blitzkreig
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 select the next foe and your allies attack. When you enter into this 
stance, you select a single target within 50 feet. All of your allies 
gain a speed bonus when moving toward that target. The bonus is 10 feet,
 plus 5 feet for every 5 skill points you have in Tactical (thus being 
+15 feet at 5 skill points, +20 feet at 10 skill points, et cetera).
     







      Call in a Favor
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Tactical
     



      When
 you’re cornered, you call in the guy with the sword to get you out of 
your dangerous situation. You can give an ally 3 of your action points 
in order for the ally to run over and attack an opponent adjacent to 
you. The ally must be willing to make the move and the attack. They may 
only use these action points for moving toward the designated opponent 
and attacking, though they may use the action points to upgrade the 
attack as they see fit. In addition, if the ally has any action points 
of their own, they may choose to use them reflexively to continue 
attacking or bolster their attack on the opponent adjacent to you.
     







      Change Formation
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      You
 call for an immediate change of formation. All of your allies within 50
 feet are automatically allowed to change their stance, free of cost, at
 their discretion.
     







      Change Places
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      You know where the forces that threaten your team members lie. You can move your ally (as long as your ally is willing).
     



      Your ally moves 5 feet
     



      Your ally moves 10 feet
     



      Your ally moves 15 feet
     



      Your ally moves 20 feet
     







      Crippling Formation
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Tactical
     



      When
 an ally makes a called shot within 25 feet of you, you make the shot 
more difficult to resist. The called shot’s strike roll is effectively 1
 point higher for every 3 skill points you have in Tactical. This only 
changes the resist and does not increase the damage or the effect.
     







      Crossfire
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      When
 you enter this stance, choose a single location (a 5 foot square). If 
anybody enters into that space, you and all of your allies can make 
reflexive attacks against that person for only 1 action point.
     







      Forewarned
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      When
 priority is called for at the beginning of a battle, you may give a +3 
to an ally’s priority roll within 25 feet, plus an additional +1 per 3 
skill points you have in Tactical. Doing so costs 1 action point 
reflexively (which comes from your first turn’s pool of action points).
     







      Focused Support
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Requires: 7 skill points in Tactical
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      You
 can build a bond with another that pushes them to greatness. When you 
begin your focused support, you choose an ally within 25 feet. That ally
 gains 1 additional action point per turn for as long as you are within 
25 feet and continue focusing your support. If you want to change the 
beneficiary of your focused support, you must begin anew. You can only 
have one focused support active at any given time.
     











      Lead the March
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      When
 you lead the march, you give your allies within 25 feet a bonus to 
their speed. This bonus lasts until the end of your next turn (when your
 action points refresh). This bonus is granted to you as well. Multiple 
bonuses from Lead the March do not stack.
     



      Speed increases by 10 feet
     



      Speed increases by 20 feet
     



      Speed increases by 30 feet
     



      Speed increases by 40 feet
     







      Malleable Formation
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Your
 allies can shift and move around the battlefield with ease, keeping 
your enemies guessing. All allies within 25 feet of you can make a 5 
foot movement during their turn for 0 action points.
     







      Master Tactician
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Requires: 15 skill points in Tactical
     



      You’re at your best when thinking on your feet. You receive 1 extra action point per turn which may be used only for reflexes.
     







      Stand-Off
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Before
 anybody takes their first turn in a combat, right as priority is about 
to be determined, you may call for a stand-off. This costs 1 action 
point, but puts the entire combat in a stand-off. Anybody may 
voluntarily take the first action, but - if they do so - every roll they
 make during their first turn suffers a penalty equal to your skill in 
tactical.
     



      If
 multiple people attempt to act first in a stand-off, they roll priority
 between themselves. After the first person in a standoff acts, everyone
 determines priority normally and moves after the stand-off breaker.
     











      p Encouraging Specialties M
     



      Encouragement
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 call out encouragement, urging your allies to a more assured victory. 
For 1 action point reflexively, you may give an ally within 50 feet a 
bonus on any one of the following rolls: accuracy, evade, strike, or 
defense. This bonus must be determined before the roll is made.
     



      +2
     



      +4
     



      +6
     



      +8
     







      Inspiring Words
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Requires: 5 skill points in Tactical & Encouragement specialty
     



      Your
 words of encouragement invoke a deep drive within your allies that 
brings about confidence, allowing them to continue battling. When using 
Encouragement, all of your within 50 feet  recover 1 hit point plus
 1 for every 10 skill points you have in Tactical.
     











      p Flow of Battle Specialties M
     



      Direct the Battle
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 set the course of battle, proclaiming the next victim of the tide. When
 you enter this stance, you choose one enemy within 50 feet to be the 
victim. While you are in this stance, you can allow a single ally per 
turn to make a special attack or called shot that costs “Attack +1 AP,” 
without spending the extra action point, so long as it is directed at 
the target of the stance.
     







      Concentrated Barrage
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Requires: Direct the Battle specialty
     



      When
 you enter into your direct the battle stance, you point at a single 
target and exclaim, “Get that fool!” Every ally within 25 feet can make a
 special attack or called shot that costs “Attack +1 AP” against the 
target of your direct the battle stance without spending that extra 
action point, though each ally only gets this benefit once per turn.
     







      Overwhelm
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Requires: Direct the Battle specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Any
 time the target of your direct the battle stance takes damage from an 
ally, you may use 1 action point to encourage your ally’s attack along.
     



      Ally’s attack does an additional 3 damage
     



      Ally’s attack does an additional 6 damage
     



      Ally’s attack does an additional 9 damage
     



      Ally’s attack does an additional 12 damage
     











      p Order Specialties M
     



      Issue Orders
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      You
 yell an order across the battlefield, and one of your allies answers 
the call. The ally must be within 50 feet and be able to hear you. Your 
order allows an ally to make a called shot using their bonuses but 
without spending any of their action points.
     



      Ally attempts the called shot
     



      Ally attempts the called shot with a +2 on the strike
     



      Ally attempts the called shot with a +4 on the strike
     



      Ally attempts the called shot with a +6 on the strike
     







      Complex Orders
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Requires: Issue Orders specialty & 5 skill points in Tactical
     



      When
 giving an ally a called shot order, you may spend the cost of one of 
your ally’s attack-modifying specialties to allow that ally to use that 
attack modifier for free.
     



      For
 instance, if your ally knows Solid Assault (under Overpower) you may 
spend an extra action point in addition to the Issue Orders cost in 
order to allow your ally to use their attack modifier for free. This 
additional action point expenditure can utilize the action point bonus 
from Direct the Battle.
     







      Improved Orders
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Requires: Issue Orders specialty, Complex Orders specialty, & 8 skill points in Tactical
     



      You
 are becoming more adept at giving orders to your allies, allowing you 1
 free action point per turn for use with the effects of Complex Orders.
     
















      Chapter 8 - Dexterity
     



      Dexterity
 is a representation of your speed, coordination, and reflexes. With 
dexterity, you can wiggle into tight areas and turn just the right 
screws without being entirely sure where your hands are. A person high 
in Dexterity is always going to catch the ball thrown at them, will have
 no problem walking across a tightrope, and might even known how to pick
 a lock.
     







      What can you do with your Dexterity attribute?
     







      Balance
     



      Attempt Cost: Movement +1 AP
     



      Want
 to walk that tightrope or simply just cross that rickety catwalk over 
the lake of acid? You need to balance. Balancing comes in four flavors, 
and your tier roll depends on what obstacle you are able to cross. Your 
narrator will identify for you the difficulty of the balancing check 
before you make your 
attempt.
     



      You
 can barely keep your balance. Taking an action other than moving or 
getting hit by something will cause you to fall.
     



      You
 may wobble from time to time, but you hold your balance. However, if 
the battlefield conditions change or you perform any action other than 
moving, roll again.
     



      You
 can confidently balance yourself. You won’t fall unless the condition 
of what you are balancing on changes, in which case roll again.
     



      You
 move as if you were on solid ground. Nothing can shake you from your 
position, save someone using an attack on you that moves you any 
distance.
     







      Jumping
     



      Attempt Cost: as a move (normally 1 AP)
     



      Long
 Jump: Jumping is tiered, based on the difficulty of the jump. You must 
get a moving start to jump your optimum distance. If you do not move at 
least 20 feet before the jump (as a separate action), you will jump half
 the distance. Any movement penalties apply to the jump distance.
     



      10 feet forward
     



      20 feet forward
     



      30 feet forward
     



      40 feet forward
     







      Vertical
 Jump: You may attempt to jump vertically for 1 action point as well. 
When you jump vertically, you can jump 1 foot up for every 5 feet you’d 
be able to move forward.
     



      Catching
 a Ledge: If you just barely fail, your narrator might allow you to roll
 your Dexterity to catch a ledge and pull yourself up. Normally, 
catching a ledge while jumping will require a tier 2 or higher Dexterity
 result.
     







      Sneaking
     



      Attempt Cost: Move +1 AP
     



      Moving
 silently will almost always be little more than an opposed roll against
 a listener’s Cunning. If you succeed in beating their Cunning, you may 
determine how well you move silently.
     



      The listener is still paranoid and thinks somebody is in your general vicinity.
     



      The
 listener believes that something rustled where you are, but it was 
probably a mouse or some other innocent thing..
     



      The listener failed to hear anything at all.
     



      The
 listener has no inkling that anybody is there, and will probably not 
bother listening for anybody anytime soon.
     







      Pickpocket
     



      Resist: Cunning (tiers down)
     



      Attempt Cost: 2 AP
     



      Someone
 in your party won’t share the map of the dungeon, or you just saw a 
really flashy purse on someone’s belt. Roll your Dexterity to determine 
how stealthily you pickpocket the target. The target resists with their 
Cunning, tiering down your result. If your result is less than tier 1, 
you fail to pickpocket the item and they are aware of your failure. You 
don’t have to know what items they have concealed in order to attempt to
 steal something, but in such a case the item you would receive is the 
narrator’s choice. You can only pickpocket items not currently equipped 
to your target. In other words, you can’t steal the sword they are 
wielding or the jetpack they’re wearing, but you can steal the sword out
 of their sheath and the keys to their clanker from their pocket. You 
can only steal one item at a time.
     



      Your
 victim feels paranoid and may begin to check their belongings for 
anything missing.
     



      Your victim thinks someone must have bumped into them.
     



      Your victim failed to realize anything had happened.
     



      Your
 victim has no idea anything of theirs is missing and won’t bother to 
check anytime soon.
     
















      Ace Skill
     



      You
 are the ace. Whether you’re seated in a world-class flying machine or 
mounted on an overgrown weasel, you know how to guide your ride and use 
it to its very best. You can do crazy flyer tricks, a barrel roll with a
 tank, and you’ll never be kicked off your horse prematurely.
     







      Backseat Driver
     



      Tactical Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      While
 in the Backseat Driver stance, you utilize your ability as a pilot or 
rider to provide the person who is driving with useful information, 
allowing them to react more quickly to situations. While you are in this
 stance, the pilot of a vehicle that you are riding (or the rider of the
 animal you are on) gets a bonus action point per turn that can be used 
for maneuvering the vehicle or mount or using Ace specialties.
     







      Co-Pilot
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      You
 make a remarkably handy co-pilot when the need arises. If adjacent to a
 ship’s pilot, you may give them any number of your action points, 
reflexively, for the pilot to use while maneuvering, accelerating, or 
slowing the vehicle.
     







      Crash Maneuver
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP reflexively
     



      When
 you are driving an airborne vehicle that is crashing to the ground, you
 can maintain your cool and attempt to prevent yourself from getting 
hurt in the crash. When the vehicle hits the ground, you can wrest 
enough control of the vehicle to keep it on a steady path. If you do so,
 everyone in the vehicle takes less falling damage. The amount depends 
on the tier of your roll.
     



      -3 wounds damage
     



      -6 wounds damage
     



      -9 wounds damage
     



      -12 wounds damage
     







      Denial Maneuver
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      You
 twist the vehicle’s controls at the last minute, making it difficult to
 target specific sections of your vehicle. When someone makes your 
vehicle the target of their attack, you can spend 2 action points in 
order to add your Ace skill to the ship’s evade roll.
     







      Driving with Knees
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 are able to control your vehicle or animal mount using your knees. If 
you are on an animal mount or driving a clanker, you get one free 
movement per turn. It also requires no hands to pilot your vehicle or 
animal mount.
     







      Flying Fortress
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Requires: 2 skill points in Ace
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      When
 piloting a vehicle, you are able to maneuver it so that incoming 
attacks won’t hit anything vital to its continued functioning, ensuring 
the ultimate defense. Your vehicle gains +1 defense for every 2 points 
you have in Ace.
     







      Hold Together
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Requires: 7 skill points in Ace
     



      During
 its final moments, even if everything is falling apart around you, you 
push your vehicle forward one last time. If a vehicle you’re piloting 
loses all of its wounds, you can still move it normally for one more 
turn. Autos are forced to remain on their previous speed setting during 
this final turn.
     







      Horseman’s Cut
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Cost: Mounted Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      When
 attacking a non-mounted opponent atop your mount or vehicle, you are 
able to make a horsemen’s cut that deals extra damage.
     



      +1 damage class
     



      +2 damage class
     



      +3 damage class
     



      +4 damage class
     







      Hostile Maneuvers
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Requires: 5 skill points in Ace
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      You
 move recklessly close to an opponent’s vehicle in an all out siege. 
While using Hostile Maneuvers, your vehicle suffers -4 defense; however,
 all attacks made by allies on your vehicle hit for 1 damage class 
higher for every 5 points you have in Ace.
     







      Level Flying
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      While you’re at the helm, nobody on board takes accuracy penalties for shooting from a fast moving vehicle.
     







      Quick-Mount
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      You
 can now mount or dismount any auto, clanker, or animal mount for no 
action point cost during your turn, whether you intend to pilot the 
vehicle or not. You can only make one such quick mounting or dismounting
 per turn.
     







      Vehicular Teamwork
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      When
 anything flies toward your vehicle, your gut instinct is to move out of
 the way. When anyone on your piloted vehicle is the target of an 
attack, you can attempt to move your entire vehicle out of the way 
first. Before they roll evade, you may roll your vehicle’s evade against
 the attack. The attacker only rolls accuracy once. If either your 
vehicle or your passenger roll higher than the accuracy of the attack, 
the attack misses.
     











      p Auto Piloting Specialties M
     



      Strafe
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      You
 know how to quickly move your auto side-to-side. Once per turn, you can
 Strafe for no action point cost. This does not change the direction 
your auto is travelling in.
     



      5 feet
     



      10 feet
     



      15 feet
     



      25 feet
     







      Evasive Strafe
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Requires: Strafe specialty
     



      The
 quick movements of your auto allow you to shake off incoming attacks. 
When you Strafe, your vehicle gains a bonus to evade until the beginning
 of your next turn. This bonus is taken away if you stop piloting the 
vehicle.
     



      +1 evade
     



      +2 evade
     



      +3 evade
     



      +4 evade
     











      p Clanker Piloting Specialties M
     



      Extension of Self
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      The
 movements of your clanker are as smooth as the movements of your body. 
When piloting a clanker you can move it using any specialty you have 
related to moving yourself. When doing so, use your skill in Ace for the
 specialty instead of your skill in the skill the specialty comes from. 
This does not allow you to move your clanker in ways it can’t on its 
own, such as jumping or flying.
     







      Piston-Spring
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Cost: Jump
     



      Whenever
 piloting a clanker, you have the ability to use its momentum to propel 
it into the air. This allows you to jump your clanker just like a normal
 person jumps.
     







      p Focused Flying Specialties M
     



      Focused Flying
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      With
 both hands on the wheel and every ounce of your being put into your 
piloting, your control of your vehicle greatly increases. While in this 
stance, you cannot take any action other than controlling your vehicle. 
You also must use two of your hands to hold onto the controls of your 
vehicle. Clankers gain 5 feet of speed for every point you have in Ace. 
Autos gain 10 feet of maximum speed for every point you have in Ace.
     







      Fine-Tuned Flying
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Requires: Focused Flying specialty & 2 skill points in Ace
     



      You
 put your all into ensuring any attacks made on your vehicle will not 
penetrate its armor. While in your Focused Flying stance, your vehicle 
gains a +1 to defense for every 2 skill points you have in Ace.
     







      Fully Focused Flying
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Requires: Focused Flying specialty & 3 skill points in Ace
     



      By
 making the continued survival of your vehicle and its crew your main 
priority, you make yourself more aware of incoming attacks. While in 
your Focused Flying stance, your vehicle gains a +1 to evade for every 3
 skill points you have in Ace.
     







      p Mounted Cavalry Specialties M
     



      Fearless Mount
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Ace
     



      You
 let your mountable animal know you’re the one in charge. When riding an
 animal mount, the animal is immune to fear effects. In addition, the 
animal will be willing to do anything you ask of it (as long as it is 
capable).
     







      One with the Beast
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      When
 mounted, you and your animal mount are perfectly in sync. You may add 
its strike and defense bonuses to yours. In addition, your mount may not
 be directly attacked; you take all incoming attacks, be they aimed at 
you or your mount.
     







      p Ramming Specialties M
     



      Ram
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Cost: Move + 1 AP
     



      You
 know how to ram your vehicle into things without damaging yourself. For
 an extra action point during a move, you can slam the vehicle you’re 
piloting into a target. This has a damage class of 10. For autos, use 
your accuracy to tier damage. Clankers will use your strike to tier 
damage. Ramming anything immediately ends your move, even if you miss.
     







      Puncture
     



      Ace Specialty
     



      Cost: Ram +1 AP (typically the same as Move +2 AP)
     



      When
 you ram a target providing cover, you break it apart. Whether attacking
 a solid wall or an armored vehicle, you can lower the degree of cover 
your target provides while still dealing damage. The cover is lowered in
 degree until someone repairs it during a period of downtime.
     



      -1 degree of cover
     



      -2 degrees of cover
     



      -3 degrees of cover
     



      -4 degrees of cover
     



      Agility Skill
     



      Speed,
 movement, lightning-fast reflexes, and the quick wits to get out of 
dodge: these are the focuses of a character with agility. Specialties 
from agility will get you an insane movement speed, free actions during 
combat, and numerous ways of clearing a battlefield - either to get to 
your target, or to get far, far away from him.
     







      Battlefield Flow
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Cost: 0 AP
     



      You’re
 constantly ready to move to a more strategic (or just plain safer) 
location. You can move 5 feet for free at any point during your turn, or
 you can do so at the end of any other person’s turn (when their action 
points refresh). You can only make one such 5-foot movement per your 
turn (that is, between the refreshing periods of your action points).
     







      Bounding Lunge
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Cost: Move + Attack
     



      You
 move and make a swipe at an opponent. By using your bounding lunge, you
 can begin a normal move, attack an opponent during the move, and then 
finish the same move.
     







      Charging Ram
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Cost: Move + Melee Attack
     



      When
 you rush toward an opponent, you mean to take them down with one swing.
 When you move toward an opponent, you gain a bonus on your strike roll 
equal to +1 for every 5 feet you spend moving toward them. This movement
 must all be in a straight line, can only come from a single move 
action, and must be your movement (it cannot be from a vehicle or 
mount).
     







      Free Movement
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Movement
 is becoming a way of life. Once per turn (and only during your turn), 
you can make a single free movement. You must be in medium or lighter 
armor to do this.
     



      10 feet
     



      20 feet
     



      30 feet
     



      40 feet
     







      Groundfighting
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      You’re
 an old hand at hugging the ground and attacking like an erupting 
geyser. You may switch from standing to prone and back again for no 
action point cost. You take no penalties for fighting while prone. You 
take no penalties for fighting in tight areas.
     







      Instant Draw
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      In
 your hand or not, it doesn’t matter. You can draw your weapon and other
 items without using any action points and at any point (even during 
another person’s turn). You draw items and weapons so fast that you do 
not leave yourself open to reflexives. (Activating items still leaves 
you open to reflexives.)
     







      Slow Falling
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      When
 you fall, you are adept at finding ways to slow your descent. You may 
ignore however much falling distance as your tier result allows. You 
must be adjacent to something when you’re falling (such as a wall, or 
through a canopy of trees). You cannot slow your fall in open air. In 
addition, you can make attacks against enemies along the line of descent
 or upon landing for no penalty.
     



      30 feet
     



      60 feet
     



      120 feet
     



      200 feet
     







      Side-Swipe
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Cost: As a melee attack reflexively
     



      When
 an opponent over-extends their attack, your dodge allows you to take 
advantage of their failure. When you successfully evade a melee attack, 
you can make a side-swipe with any one-handed melee weapon against your 
attacker. You can optionally move 5 feet around your opponent (staying 
adjacent to the attacking opponent) at no additional action point cost. 
You gain a bonus on your accuracy roll for every point that the 
attacker’s original accuracy roll missed you by.
     











      Slipstreaming
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Cost: Move + 1 AP
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Agility
     



      Your
 incredible speed sets the pace for your allies. For an additional 
action point while moving, you can designate your exact path as a 
slipstream line. If any of your allies follow the path of your 
slipstream for at least 15 feet within the next turn (before the next 
time your action points refresh), they can make that move at no cost.
     



      Note:
 If the ally would normally require multiple action points to move, they
 may use your slipstream to move for 1 less action point than they 
otherwise would.
     







      Snake Bite
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      You
 lash out at an opponent like a coiled snake before following through 
with the rest of your attack. You may use your first action point of 
your turn to make a normal, unaltered melee attack with a medium or 
smaller weapon. No specialties may alter this attack.
     







      Step Back
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Just
 before you’re about to take a pounding, you skip back a couple feet and
 barely dodge the attack. After failing to evade, you may attempt to 
step back. Roll your agility. If your agility result is a tier higher 
than the opponent’s damage tier, then you can ignore the blow and move 
to any adjacent square that is not adjacent to the attacking opponent.
     



      If the opponent rolls tier 4 damage, there is no way to step back from it.
     







      Terrain Mastery
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      You excel at crossing a wide variety of landscapes. You ignore penalties for moving through rough terrain.
     







      Wall Runner
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Requires: 6 skill points in Agility
     



      Cost: Move +1 AP
     



      Your
 feet move so quickly that you can bound up walls. When wall running, if
 you end your turn (though not necessarily your move) on a vertical 
surface, you will slip and fall off of it.
     



      Note:
 You may also use this specialty in conjunction with Free Movement for 
just 1 action point.
     







      Walk Over
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      A
 row of enemies form little blockade against you. You can pass through a
 space occupied by an enemy as though the enemy wasn’t even there. If 
for some reason this would allow the enemy to attack you, they are 
denied that privilege. You cannot end your movement in their space - you
 must pass through.
     







      p Explosion Dodging Specialties M
     



      Blast Dodger
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Perhaps
 it’s your nerves, perhaps you’ve been caught up in explosions too many 
times. Regardless, you’re always ready to get out of dodge. You may jump
 out of the way of a blast, once per turn, for 0 action points.
     







      Soaring Dodge
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Requires: 5 skill points in Agility
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Large
 blast radiuses? It’s not anything you can’t get out of. While you are 
dodging a blast, you may spend an additional action point reflexively 
per 5 skill points you have in agility in order to make extra moves and 
escape the blast radius.
     











      p Phasing Specialties M
     



      Phase Step
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      Cost: Move (normally 1 AP)
     



      When
 you move, you may instead phase step. When you phase step, you move 
quickly and in a way hard to notice. In order to hit you while you move,
 an opponent must make a Cunning resist against your agility to even 
notice your movement.
     







      Fleeting Shade
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Requires: Phase Step specialty
     



      Cost: Move
     



      Face
 it, it’s a whole lot harder to hide yourself in broad daylight. When 
phase-stepping from the open to a hiding place, you may roll below to 
give yourself a bonus to your Dexterity against opponents attempting to 
notice you so you can get hidden fast.
     



      +3 against enemies’ resists in attempt to see you.
     



      +6 against enemies’ resists in attempt to see you.
     



      +9 against enemies’ resists in attempt to see you.
     



      +12 against enemies’ resists in attempt to see you.
     







      Leave No Trace
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Requires: Phase Step specialty
     



      Cost: Move (reflexively)
     



      You
 constantly move through the shadows so that enemies will never be able 
to keep track of you or where you’ve been. You may Phase Step 
reflexively when enemies attempt to find you in your hiding place.
     











      p Stance-Shifting Specialties M
     



      Shifting
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Requires: 2 stances known
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 have learned how to switch between your stances using only slight 
movements, keeping your enemy in the dark about your next strike. When 
you are in one of your stances, you can shift to another stance at any 
time, during anybody’s turn.
     







      Freeform Shifting
     



      Agility Specialty
     



      Requires: 12 skill points in Agility, Shifting specialty, & 3 stances known
     



      Your
 feet are constantly moving, guaranteeing your opponent never has a 
clue. You may now use Shifting at no action point cost once per combat 
turn (between the times when your action points refresh).
     












      Marksmanship Skill
     



      Whether
 you’re one for pulling out your pistol and getting off a warning shot 
at the start of combat, or you like to stand behind a pillar with your 
bow and pick off enemies as your warrior-friend distracts them, 
marksmanship is the right skill for you. Encompassing all aspects of 
ranged weaponry, your skill at a distance will make you a frightening 
foe.
     







      Aim
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Marksmanship
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Before
 you take your shot, you can spend some time lining up your sights and 
aiming. You can spend any number of action points preparing yourself, 
and, for every action point you spend aiming, you may roll on the chart 
in order to gain a bonus to your accuracy. You can start aiming one turn
 and then fire in a subsequent turn, but if you are attacked after you 
start aiming (but before you fire), you lose any bonus you would’ve 
gained from aiming. You cannot gain any more accuracy to an attack than 
you have skill in marksmanship.
     



      +1 to the accuracy roll
     



      :        +2 to the accuracy roll
     



      +3 to the accuracy roll
     



      +4 to the accuracy roll
     







      Cover Fire
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: as a Ranged Attack
     



      While
 you don’t mind hitting the target, the real goal is to prevent the 
target from firing at your friend. When you provide cover fire, you take
 a -6 on your accuracy rolls but also provoke the target into attacking 
you (see Social Tells in the Chapter 1). You gain a bonus on the cunning
 roll equal to your skill in marksmanship.
     







      Follow Up
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      When
 you figure out how to nail that bastard, it’s not hard to do it again. 
If you land a ranged attack on a target and they do not move from their 
space before you attack again, you gain a bonus to accuracy and strike 
for you second attack. As long as the opponent does not move, the bonus 
continues with every subsequent attack. You do not gain the bonus 
multiple times; however, you may re-roll with every subsequent attack to
 gain a higher bonus, at your discretion.
     



      +2 to accuracy and strike
     



      +4 to accuracy and strike
     



      +6 to accuracy and strike
     



      +8 to accuracy and strike
     







      Head Popper
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      When
 they stick their head out of cover, you pop them right quick. When a 
foe leaves cover (to any degree), you can instantly make a reflexive 
ranged attack against them for 1 action point. If there is any dispute 
as to who gets to make the first attack, you win (unless there are two 
people with Head Popper, in which case it’ll be decided by a priority 
roll).
     







      Itchy Trigger Finger
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Your
 friends might think you just randomly shot a bush, but you know better.
 If you have even the inkling that there’s somebody sneaking around 
within your gun’s range and you’re not aware of them, you can try to 
shoot them. You take the normal penalties for firing blindly, but they 
are still targeted. If there are multiple people sneaking around, your 
shot will target the closest one.
     



      If
 you miss, there is no reason the sneaking person will be identified, 
and you’ll probably just assume that there is nobody there.
     







      Knock-Off
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates)
     



      Cost: Ranged Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 take aim at a mounted opponent and attempt to shoot them off their 
mount or personal vehicle. Use your skill in marksmanship in a roll-off 
against their Dexterity. If you succeed, they are thrown off of their 
mount or personal vehicle.
     







      Lockdown Gunner
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      When
 the villain pulls out his doomsday device or the assassin draws a vial 
of poison, you’ll snipe it right out of their hands. You can reflexively
 attack from a range whenever anybody draws or activates an item. (And, 
as per normal, you can always make this a called shot to their hand in 
order to disarm them of the item.)
     







      Long Shot
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: Ranged Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 test the air and adjust accordingly, doubling the range that your 
weapon is accurate to. (Shooting beyond that range takes accuracy 
penalties as is normal for your weapon.)
     







      Penetrating Shot
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: Ranged Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 use your ranged weapon in such a way that their armor offers little 
protection. For the purposes of this attack, lower your opponent’s soak 
class by 1 for every tier that you receive with your marksmanship roll. 
This does not permanently affect the armor.
     



      Ignores 1 soak class
     



      Ignores 2 soak class
     



      Ignores 3 soak class
     



      Ignores 4 soak class
     







      Point Blank
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: Ranged Attack +1 AP
     



      When
 your opponent’s up close, you don’t lose your calm. You just shoot 
them. You can make a Point Blank attack when using a ranged weapon 
against an adjacent opponent. You gain an immediate accuracy bonus for 
making the point blank attack.
     



      +3 accuracy
     



      +6 accuracy
     



      +9 accuracy
     



      +12 accuracy
     







      Seeker
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      By
 focusing in on the opponent, you can ignore their cover bonuses. Any 
time an opponent is being granted evade bonuses from cover, you may 
ignore it up to your skill in marksmanship. Thus, if they have light 
cover (granting them a +4 to evade) and you have 3 points in 
marksmanship, they only receive a +1 to evade.
     







      Snap Reload
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      You’ve
 been in enough gunfights that you’re quite proficient at readying your 
firearms and crossbows. You can ready any firearm or crossbow that 
you’re wielding for one less action point (to a minimum of 0). If you 
are wielding two or more crossbows or firearms, each one gains the 
reduction from snap reload.
     







      Sneaky Seconds
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 action points per turn
     



      You
 let off two shots so fast that, though they might evade the first one, 
they’re going to run straight into the second. Sneaky seconds activates 
immediately upon two consecutive ranged attacks being made in the same 
turn. Regardless of whether the first attack hits or not, the second 
ranged attack gains a bonus to its accuracy equal to your skill in 
marksmanship for determining if it hits (damage remains the same).
     



      Note:
 If you can make a third attack in the turn, it does not gain the sneaky
 seconds bonus. That said, a fourth attack would!
     







      Stable Shot
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 points in Brute
     



      You
 no longer need to be in footing stance to fire a super-heavy bow, 
crossbow, or firearm. You may do it from a standing, normal position.
     







      Turret
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 find the perfect spot on the battlefield. You sweep around the field, 
raise your rifle, and fire. Nothing’s going to get to you.
     



      While
 in this stance, you cannot move. You must be stationary and on your 
feet (you cannot be mounted). If you move, you fall out of your Turret 
stance. For 2 action points reflexively, you can make a ranged attack at
 anything that moves so much as five feet toward you.
     



      If
 anybody comes into a space adjacent to you, you can make ranged attacks
 against them for 1 action point during your turn and with a bonus to 
your damage class, if you hit.
     



      +1 damage class
     



      +2 damage class
     



      +3 damage class
     



      +4 damage class
     











      Warning Shot
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: as a Ranged Attack
     



      You
 can take a shot designed to miss, but also designed to scare the gods 
out of the target. When you take a warning shot, no attack rolls are 
necessary - instead, you may roll your Cunning to intimidate the person 
from afar (see Social Tells in Chapter 1). You gain a bonus on the 
intimidation roll equal to your skill in marksmanship.
     







      Wing Clipping
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Resist: Brute (if the method of flight is physical) or Sciences (if the method of flight is mechanical)
     



      Cost: Ranged Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 take aim at a foe flying under their own power and shoot them out of 
the sky. Use your skill in marksmanship in a roll-off against their 
resist. If you meet or exceed their resist, you successfully disable 
their ability to fly. They will be able to fly again once they either 
successfully resist or they hit ground. They can attempt to resist for 
free at the end of their turn (when their action points refresh) or by 
spending 1 action point at any time.
     



      Note:
 If the target has multiple ways of flying, wing clipping will only 
disable one at a time.
     







      p Archery Specialties M
     



      Arching Shot
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: Bow Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 can now make an arching shot. An arching shot is one in which you 
launch your arrow higher into the air, planning for it to come down at 
just the right spot to strike your opponent. When using an arching shot,
 your bow can shoot accurately another 25 feet per point you have in 
your marksmanship skill. To make this attack, you cannot have a ceiling 
within 100 feet,
     







      Efficient Ranger
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Marksmanship
     



      You
 nock your arrow, pull the string back, and release as though you’ve 
been doing it since you were a wee babe. You may now make attacks with 
heavy and super-heavy bows for 2 action points instead of the normal 3.
     







      Flight of Arrows
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: Bow Attack +1 AP
     



      You
 release a flight of arrows, having nocked multiple arrows all at once. 
Make your normal attack. If you hit, instead of doing damage with your 
strike, you act as if you hit them multiple times with tier 1 damage. 
Each arrow may be soaked by the opponent’s defense.
     



      2 arrows that deal tier 1 damage
     



      3 arrows that deal tier 1 damage
     



      4 arrows that deal tier 1 damage
     



      5 arrows that deal tier 1 damage
     







      Note:
 A flight of arrows acts as multiple attacks for the purposes of 
determining damage, but other abilities (such as other attack-modifying 
specialties or bow augments) only affect the target once if they’re 
applied to the flight of arrows.
     











      p Bleeding Arrow Specialties M
     



      Flesh Biter
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Cost: Bow Attack +1 AP
     



      You’ve
 got a knack for using arrows to make the target bleed out. When making a
 Flesh Biter attack, the arrow causes the target to start bleeding out. 
They’ll continue to bleed until they spend 1 action point to stop the 
bleeding (which will stop up to 5 points of bleeding). The damage will 
incur at the end of their turn (when their action points refresh).
     



      2 point of bleeding
     



      4 points of bleeding
     



      6 points of bleeding
     



      8 points of bleeding
     







      Flesh Piercing
     



      Marksmanship Specialty
     



      Requires: Flesh Biter specialty
     



      Your
 flesh biting arrows sink in, dealing excruciating damage every turn 
until removed. Bleeding done from a Flesh Biter is difficult to stop, 
and acts as though it is twice as much when attempting to stop. (Thus, 
if the target has 4 points of bleeding on them from a Flesh Biter, it 
counts as 8 points for the purposes of stopping the bleeding.)
     




















      Swashbuckling Skill
     



      The
 swashbuckler specializes in fancy flourishes, graceful attacks, and 
absolutely dominating their opponent. Excelling in one-on-one opponents,
 a swashbuckler chooses their target and shuts them down. The 
Swashbuckling skill is designed for fast attacks that weave through an 
opponent’s defenses and sink in right through the ribcage.
     







      Adaptable
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Requires: 2 stances known
     



      Your
 footwork is solid, your training and familiarity perfect, and your 
stances have become second nature. You can always keep one stance active
 and you cannot be forcibly removed from that stance. When you enter a 
stance, you can designate it as your background stance. By designating 
one as your background stance, you can have two stances going at the 
same time, one as your background stance and one as your normal stance.
     



      If you have two stances active, they cannot be mutually exclusive in any way.
     







      Circle Attack
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively (when melee attacking)
     



      When
 the opponent attempts to deflect your attack, you bring your blade 
around their protections and into their gut. When an opponent attempts 
to deflect one of your melee attacks, you can spend 1 action point in 
order to circle around their deflection. This negates their deflection 
bonus.
     



      If
 the opponent can make multiple deflections against your attack, you may
 spend 1 action point per deflection to circle around each one.
     







      Counter-Stance
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 may declare a Counter-Stance against one opponent. If at any point you 
are attacked by the marked opponent, you can make a reflexive attack for
 1 action point against that opponent, even before they finish their 
attack.
     







      Efficient Strike
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      Focusing
 on the weakest points of your opponent, you are able to home in on 
their vitals. When you use an Efficient Strike, you may add the number 
by which your accuracy roll exceeded your target’s evade roll as a bonus
 to your strike.
     







      Fight Anywhere
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Hanging
 off railing and fighting with your sword in your teeth? No problem! You
 no longer take penalties for fighting on uneven surfaces, awkward 
terrain, in an unusual position, with your sword in your teeth, or while
 hanging from a wall.
     







      Hilt Bash
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Cost: 0 AP reflexively
     



      When
 somebody attempts to keep you down, you bash them in the face. Any time
 an adjacent opponent attempts to negate an attack you’re in the process
 of making, you may instantly make a melee attack against them with the 
weapon you’re attacking with at no cost. (And no, the hilt bash can’t be
 negated.)
     







      Opening
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Your
 keen senses notice when somebody stumbles and leaves themselves open. 
If anybody within melee range of you gets a 1 or lower on their evade 
(when being attacked by another person), you can immediately attack them
 for 1 action point, using the evade that they rolled to determine if 
you hit them.
     







      Precise Attack
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      A
 Precise Attack is one that has an improved chance of hitting. You roll 
your accuracy multiple times and take the highest result to determine if
 you hit. (If you roll a pure 12, continue rolling to figure out what 
the final result is. The pure 12 and attached rolls will only count as 
one roll.)
     



      You roll two dice
     



      You roll three dice
     



      You roll four dice
     



      You roll five dice
     







      Saluted Opponent
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      When
 you enter into this stance, you select one opponent and you salute him.
 You gain a bonus on your melee accuracy rolls against that opponent 
equal to your skill in Swashbuckling. When you are in this stance, you 
take a -2 on evade rolls against all attacks from people other than your
 saluted opponent.
     



      To select a new opponent, you must renew your stance for 1 action point
     







      Sword and Board
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You’re a wiz at fending off incoming attacks. While in this stance, you can make one free deflection per turn.
     







      Wild Slash
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Cost: as a Melee Attack
     



      Instead
 of a normal melee attack, you can make a Wild Slash. This is 
effectively the same as a melee attack, but you determine your accuracy 
differently. Instead, roll two dice and don’t add your accuracy. Add the
 results from the two dice, and that is your accuracy roll.
     



      If
 either die shows a 1, the entire roll is a 1. When using a Wild Slash, 
12s do not explode (that is, you do not re-roll 12s and add the next 
number) unless both dice show 12s, in which case you may roll both again
 and add the result to 24.
     











      p En-Garde Specialties M
     



      En-Garde
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 may only enter this stance when you are wielding a melee weapon in one 
hand and have the other hand empty, perhaps for balance or perhaps for 
grabbing things coming your way. While in the En-Garde stance, you can 
take no penalties on your accuracy rolls with melee attacks, and you 
gain a +4 on all accuracy rolls for reflexive attacks. If you switch 
weapons or are disarmed, you exit this stance.
     







      Find the Gap
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Requires: En-Garde specialty & 8 skill points in Swashbuckling
     



      Armor?
 Pah! That stuff stands no chance against your fine blade. While in your
 En-Garde stance, any time you hit an opponent, their soak class is 
lowered by 1 point for every 8 skill points you have in Swashbuckling 
for the purposes of the attack.
     







      Lightning Slash
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Requires: En-Garde specialty & 16 skill points in Swashbuckling
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      While
 in your En-Garde stance, you can make Lightning Slashes for 1 action 
point apiece. A Lightning Slash is similar to a normal melee attack, 
except that it costs 1 action point and you add your skill in 
Swashbuckling in place of your strike in order to determine your damage.
 A Lightning Slash must be using a one-handed melee weapon and does not 
count as an attack. A Lightning Slash cannot be used in conjunction with
 any other modifying specialty that allows for “attack +1 AP,” as you 
are no longer making an attack but a Lightning Slash.
     











      p Flickering Specialties M
     



      Flickering
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Cost: One-Handed Melee Attack +1 AP
     



      Sometimes
 the last thing the opponent ever sees is your hand going for your 
weapon. Your attacks are like a flicker, getting in multiple strikes all
 at once. Make your normal accuracy roll. If you hit, instead of doing 
damage with your strike, you act as if you hit them multiple times with 
tier 1 damage. Unfortunately, each “attack” may be soaked by the 
opponent’s defense.
     



      2 attacks that deal tier 1 damage
     



      3 attacks that deal tier 1 damage
     



      5 attacks that deal tier 1 damage
     



      7 attacks that deal tier 1 damage
     







      Note:
 A Flickering attack acts as multiple attacks for the purposes of 
determining damage, but other abilities (such as other attack-modifying 
specialties or weapon augments) only affect the target once if they’re 
applied to the Flickering attack.
     



      Torrent of Steel
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Requires: Flickering specialty & 25 skill points in Swashbuckling
     



      Cost: Flickering +2 AP
     



      Small
 scrapes and scratches? No longer: your Flickering attacks blend the 
opponent into bloodied pieces. Your Flickering attacks each deal tier 2 
damage.
     







      p Footwork Specialties M
     



      Footwork Training
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      At
 the end of any turn during which you move, you receive a bonus to your 
accuracy and evade. Roll your swashbuckling at the end of any turn in 
which you move, and you gain a bonus to your accuracy and evade until 
the end of your next turn (when your action points refresh).
     



      +1
     



      +2
     



      +3
     



      +4
     







      Fancy Footwork
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Requires: Footwork Training specialty
     



      You
 are no longer a trainee: your footwork is that of a master. From now 
on, when determining your Footwork Training bonus, use the Fancy 
Footwork chart.
     



      +3
     



      +4
     



      +5
     



      +6
     







      p Parry & Riposte Specialties M
     



      Parry
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      When
 you are hit in melee with an attack that deals tier 1 damage, you have 
the option of parrying as a reflex. Roll accuracy and add your skill in 
Swashbuckling, and, if you score higher than the accuracy roll that hit 
you, you negate the blow.
     







      Beat Parry
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Requires: Parry specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates)
     



      Cost: Parry +1 AP
     



      When
 you Parry, you smash the opponent’s weapon so hard they have a 
difficult time keeping grasp of it. When you do a Beat Parry, your Parry
 also acts like a called shot to the hand primarily holding the weapon 
attacking you.
     







      Distance Parry
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Requires: Parry specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 don’t parry with your blade. Oh no, you parry by simply not being in 
the place they’re attacking. You can parry by moving. It works exactly 
as a Parry, except that you may also immediately move.
     



      Because you’re moving, you cannot Distance Parry and then Riposte.
     







      Experienced Parries
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Requires: Parry specialty & 9 skill points in Swashbuckling
     



      Cost: 1 (or more) AP
     



      You’re
 no longer restricted to parrying the tier 1 attacks - you can push off 
the best of blows. You can attempt to parry any attack, but you must 
spend 1 action point per tier of the attack’s damage. (Thus, if an 
attack is dealing tier 3 damage, you’ll need to use 3 action points in 
order to attempt the parry.)
     







      Riposte
     



      Swashbuckling Specialty
     



      Requires: Parry specialty
     



      When
 you successfully Parry an attack, you can then immediately make a 
reflexive attack against the person you parried for no additional action
 points cost. You may upgrade the Riposte as per a normal attack, but 
the upgrades cost action points as per normal.
     
















      Chapter 9 - Spirit
     



      Spirit
 breaks the limits within oneself. You use Spirit when attempting to 
focus yourself, resisting ethereal forces, or when praying for aid from 
deities. With Spirit, you can push for the stars, keep on going no 
matter what, and always believe in your path.
     







      What can you do with your Spirit attribute?
     







      Concentration
     



      You
 stay focused on your task. Whether it be staying conscious after being 
drugged, refusing to let a silver-tongued charmer manipulate you, or 
focusing on an elusive target in a loud and crowded space, Concentration
 allows you to weed out what you don’t need to be paying attention to 
and puts all your mind towards achieving your goal.
     



      You lose track of what you were doing.
     



      You
 are able to shut out some of the extraneous noise. You can see your 
objective, but you’re not fully able to keep your eyes on them.
     



      You
 have your target locked in your sights but your focus could still be 
broken by external stimuli.
     



      Everything
 else in the world fades away. All you see is your objective and how to 
grasp it.
     







      Narrator: Determining Distractions
     



      If
 the player is in a gray room with no decorations and only one other 
person, concentrating on them should be rather easy. However, if the 
player finds him- or herself in the middle of a crowded, noisy market 
and the target is wearing the uniform of a town guard, keeping track of 
them will be a lot harder. Keep this in mind when determining bonuses 
and penalties.
     







      Heroics
     



      Attempt Cost: Any resist +1 AP (reflexively)
     



      Those
 who use Spirit have little that they can do with it alone, but a strong
 Spirit can save a person in times of duress. Any time you make a resist
 roll (or are making an attribute roll at a critical time, as per your 
narrator’s discretion), you can attempt to do so heroically. This 
requires an extra action point, but will give you either a bonus or a 
penalty, depending on how well your Spirit is rolled. Once you’ve rolled
 your Spirit, you can roll the other attribute normally - but now you 
get the following modifier on that roll:
     



      -4
     



      +2
     



      +6
     



      +12
     
























      Faith Skill
     



      Faith
 is a powerful tool, and it’s one you can utilize to make your foes wish
 they had half as much faith as you. Regardless of where your faith 
comes from or toward what goals you put it, your devotion to a cause 
manifests itself in your actions. A person of faith can reinvigorate 
allies, move through obstacles as though they don’t exist, and survive 
far longer than what the faithless think possible.
     







      Blind Faith
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: 6 skill points in Faith
     



      Cost: same as an Attack
     



      You
 lash out without hesitation, believing that your next attack is going 
to land true. When making an unaltered attack (as in, no other 
specialties are applied to it, including those that do not use action 
points, such as Critical Hits in Espionage), you may use your skill in 
Faith in place of your accuracy bonus for the accuracy roll.
     







      Conviction
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Resist: Spirit (negates)
     



      Cost: Attack +1 AP
     



      Any
 time you are attacking a corrupted creatures, such as those who have 
risen from the dead, automatons, or horrible abominations, you can 
attack with Conviction. If the target fails to resist, all of their 
damage soak is negated.
     







      Divine Guidance
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      You
 close your eyes and guide your injured ally through faith alone. You 
can eliminate all status penalties on a person for one turn by giving 
them Divine Guidance at the beginning of their turn. Divine Guidance 
negates penalties from wounds, status effects, stuns, et cetera. (It 
does not negate fatal effects.) Any penalties incurred during their turn
 begin when their action points refresh, and all of their normal 
penalties return to them.
     







      Flowing Vigor
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin and 1 AP to channel
     



      You
 channel life back into an ally within 25 feet, replenishing their hit 
points. When you begin Flowing Vigor, you spend 2 action points and roll
 on the tier chart. Thereafter, you may heal that amount of hit points 
again for only 1 action point. You may continue the channel through your
 turn and into consecutive turns, but if you take any action other than 
channeling and moving, Flowing Vigor is broken and must be begun anew.
     



      2 hit points
     



      4 hit points
     



      6 hit points
     



      8 hit points
     











      Grief & Hope
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP (1 AP sacrifices)
     



      The
 healing power of Grief and Hope can be an awesome sight to behold. You 
can channel that energy to reinvigorate ailing allies. For three action 
points, you can call upon your allies within 25 feet to give you their 
Grief and Hope in order to save another. When you do this, you can roll 
your Faith to heal 3 hit points per tier you reach. The target of the 
healing can be any ally within 25 feet.
     



      Restores 3 hit points
     



      Restores 6 hit points
     



      Restores 9 hit points
     



      Restores 12 hit points
     







      For
 each action point an ally gives you, the amount of hit points the 
target heals increases by 2 per tier. Thus, if two people sacrifice an 
action point each for your channeled healing, the target will heal 7 hit
 points per tier your Faith roll receives.
     



      Each
 ally may only sacrifice 1 action point for any given usage of Grief 
& Hope.
     







      Healing Halo
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Everyone
 around you draws upon your divine energies. At the end of every turn 
that you are in your Healing Halo stance, you and your living allies 
within 25 feet regain a small amount of hit points. You and your allies 
gain 1 hit point, plus 1 for every 5 skill points you have in faith, at 
the end of every turn that you spent in Healing Halo (when your action 
points refresh).
     







      Infallible Faith
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively (1 AP sacrifices)
     



      Your
 allies’ belief in you is infallible, their faith ensuring that you 
never fail. You may use Infallible Faith whenever you must roll a 
resist. You immediately gain a +2 bonus on the resist. Every ally within
 25 feet may also sacrifice a single action point to you, increasing the
 bonus by another +3 per sacrificing ally.
     







      Moral Support
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: a Spirit of 8
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      When
 a friend is in need, you can push them forward to greater feats of 
heroism. Any time you know of an ally within 25 feet being forced to use
 an attribute as a resist or in some momentary peril (such as having to 
jump a chasm or wrestle free a powerful device from a crazed maniac), 
you may roll your heroics (found under the Spirit attribute) and give 
them the bonus. If you roll poorly and receive a penalty as per your 
heroics result, that penalty is applied on your ally’s attribute roll, 
regardless of whether they want it there or not.
     







      Prayer
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP (1 AP sacrifices)
     



      With
 your allies on each side of you, you know you’re able to push onward 
with only their prayers. When you begin the Prayer, you roll on the 
chart, granting yourself temporary hit points. For each action point an 
ally gives you, roll again on the chart. Each ally may only sacrifice 1 
action point for your Prayer and must be within 25 feet to do so. Prayer
 may not be used again until these temporary hit points are gone. If you
 were damaged at the time the Prayer begins, these hit points instead 
act as healing.
     



      Gain 2 temporary hit point
     



      Gain 3 temporary hit points
     



      Gain 4 temporary hit points
     



      Gain 5 temporary hit points
     







      Purify
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      By
 laying your hands on yourself or an ally, your devotion allows your 
target to ignore the penalties from an ongoing poison, disease, 
parasite, called shot, wound, or other effect for a number of turns 
equal to your skill in faith. The target can not be Purified again until
 the effects of the first Purification wear off. If the effect of the 
penalty would have naturally worn off during the time the Purification 
was occurring, it does not resume once the Purification ends.
     



      Ignore 1 effect
     



      Ignore up to 2 effects
     



      Ignore up to 3 effects
     



      Ignore all effects
     











      Shock of Life
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: 10 skill points in Faith
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      When
 times seem dire, you know how to shock somebody back into existence. 
You instantly heal, through touch, a number of hit points equal to twice
 your skill in Faith. This burst of energy, however, has some negative 
effects on the target. You roll your faith to determine how minor the 
negative effects are. A target may, at their discretion, ignore the 
Shock of Life altogether, though this must be decided prior to the Faith
 roll.
     



      Target is stunned for 3 AP
     



      Target is stunned for 2 AP
     



      Target is stunned for 1 AP
     



      Target suffers no ill effect
     







      p AP Sacrifice Upgrade Specialties M
     



      Devoted Peers
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: any specialty that calls upon sacrificial action points
     



      Your
 friends are loyal and devoted like few others. When you call upon them 
to sacrifice their action points for your specialties, they may 
sacrifice up to two action points each.
     







      Self-Sacrifice
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 action points per turn & any specialty that calls upon sacrificial action points
     



      Your
 faith is so strong that it alone can guide your attacks. When you call 
upon others to sacrifice action points to your specialties, you may 
sacrifice your own action points as well. You, however, are not limited,
 and may sacrifice as many action points as you have available to you.
     







      Silent Devotion
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: any specialty that calls upon sacrificial action points
     



      Your
 beliefs do not need to be yelled, exclaimed, or shouted. When you call 
upon others to sacrifice action points to you, you do so by your 
willpower alone. You may now ask for your allies’ sacrifices with 
complete silence and no outward visual or audible  cues to your 
foes.
     











      p Champion Specialties M
     



      Appointed Champion
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 mark a nearby ally as your Champion and channel your Faith into him. 
While in this stance, any time said Champion would need to make a Spirit
 roll, he may choose to let you roll for him and apply your Spirit 
attribute’s bonus.
     







      Conduit of Faith
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: Appointed Champion specialty
     



      You
 draw the breath from nearby allies and empower your Champion. Anyone 
within 25 feet may sacrifice their last action point they have for the 
turn (at the end of their turn, when their action points refresh) to 
your Appointed Champion. It must be their last action point, and the 
action point is immediately added to the Appointed Champion’s pool of 
action points.
     







      p Inquisition Specialties M
     



      Proclaim the Heretic
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 proclaim an enemy to be a heretic, a faithless vagabond, and now no one
 will lose their courage against him. Choose a single opponent when you 
enter this stance. When that heretic attacks you or one of your allies, 
you or the ally can spend 1 action point in order to roll the Spirit 
attribute instead of defense in order to determine damage soaked.
     



      To
 Proclaim a different Hheretic, you will need to change stance (costing 1
 action point).
     



      Light in the Dark
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: Proclaim the Heretic specialty
     



      Your
 allies are protected by your faith when confronting the heretic. You 
and all of your allies may choose to use your Spirit in place of their 
defense bonus when soaking damage dealt by the Proclaimed Heretic. 
Making this choice does not cost anybody any action points.
     











      p Smiting Specialties M
     



      Smite
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP (1 AP sacrifices)
     



      Your
 allies’ belief in your attack guides your hand against the unfaithful. 
You call for your allies’ faith, and their prayers give your attack 
strength. When you begin to make a Smite, you call for your allies 
within 25 feet to sacrifice 1 action point in order to empower your 
attack. Any ally who can hear you (or knows that you called for their 
belief) and is within range can, reflexively, sacrifice the action 
point. If your attack lands, your attack deals damage as if it were one 
damage class higher for every action point an ally sacrificed to you. If
 nobody sacrificed an action point for the smite, it is treated like a 
normal attack.
     



      An
 ally can only sacrifice one action point per smite, and if the smite 
misses, the sacrificed action points are simply lost.
     







      Assured Success
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: Smite specialty
     



      When
 you Smite your foes, your blade is guided by faith into the enemy. For 
every action point sacrificed for your Smite, the attack gains a +1 on 
the accuracy roll.
     



      Impassioned Victory
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: 17 skill points in Faith & Smite specialty
     



      When
 your Smite fells an evil foe, the attack is inspiring and leads your 
allies on to greater deeds. When your Smite kills or incapacitates the 
person being attacked, all of those who sacrificed action points to 
empower your Smite instantly regain those sacrificed action points.
     



      Smiting Shot
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: Smite specialty
     



      Your
 allies’ faith steadies your shot and flies with the bullet. You may now
 make ranged Smites, be it with a bow, firearm, or other ranged weapon.
     











      Zealous Smite
     



      Faith Specialty
     



      Requires: Smite specialty & 7 skill points in Faith
     



      Your
 smite does not merely deal great destruction but is also a weapon of 
finesse and a tool of your faith. Any action point sacrificed to your 
Smite can, instead of increasing your attack’s damage class, be used 
like a normal action point for modifying the attack with another 
specialty that you know.
     



      For
 example, if you have the Conviction specialty (normally made as an 
attack +1 AP) and you make a Smite, you can convert one of the action 
points sacrificed to you in order to make your Smite into a Smite with 
Conviction.
     
















      Grace Skill
     



      Grace
 is understanding yourself and bypassing your inner limits. Those fully 
serene are often known for their seemingly super-human abilities, their 
ability to ignore pain, ignore barriers, and do things that simply 
aren’t considered possible for other people. Is Grace magic? No, at 
least that’s what the practitioners of Grace will say. Grace is simply 
the wisdom of knowing your limits and how to bypass them.
     















      Bloodsoak
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Requires: 4 skill points in Grace
      
      Your
 blood does not flow freely at another person’s convenience. Through 
unearthly bodily training, you can keep yourself from bleeding from deep
 gashes. When you would suffer bleeding damage, you may ignore 1 point 
per 4 skill points you have in Grace.
     




      Connection
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
      
      Resist: Spirit (negates)
      
      When
 you lock eyes with an opponent, they cannot easily break the gaze. To 
make this connection, an opponent within 100 feet makes a Spirit roll 
opposed by your grace. If you succeed, their gaze is locked with yours. 
They cannot move behind any cover that would break the gaze or attack 
anybody else. If somebody or something walks between the two of you, 
that will give the opponent an automatic and free resist to break the 
gaze. The opponent can back away (moving with a -10 feet move penalty), 
and the connection is automatically broken at 100 feet.
      
      If
 the opponent is actively avoiding your gaze (potentially because they 
know you have this ability), you might need to be creative in order to 
force them to look toward you. If a connection is made through a mirror,
 the connected people must stay at that angle or the connection is lost.
     




      Danger Sense
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Requires: 5 skill points in Grace
      
      Resist: Cunning (negates)
      
      Cost: 1 AP reflexively (to warn others)
      
      When
 a sniper locks onto you from a thousand feet away, you can feel it in 
your bones and through the chill on your neck. When you or an adjacent 
ally are about to be attacked, roll your Grace against the first 
attacker’s Cunning. If your Grace meets or exceeds their Cunning, you 
may have your hit points up and make a full evade roll against the 
attack.
      
      If you spend 1
 action point reflexively, you may warn others in your vicinity so that 
they have the same bonus. This warning is done as the attack is 
launched, so an opponent cannot stop his first attack from going off 
after the warning is given.
     




      Destabilize
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Resist: Dexterity or Spirit (target’s discretion, tiers down)
      
      Cost: Attack +1 AP
      
      Your
 attack disrupts their center of gravity, ensuring that they won’t be 
able to enter a stance for several moments. If the opponent is in a 
stance, they are knocked out of it unless they can resist against your 
skill in grace.
      
      If 
the target is not in a stance, however, the target cannot enter a stance
 until they spend some action points to stabilize again.
      
      Destabilized until 1 action point is spent to stabilize
      
      Destabilized until 2 action points are spent to stabilize
      
      Destabilized until 3 action points are spent to stabilize
      
      Destabilized until 4 action points are spent to stabilize
      

      Dispel Pain
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
      
      When
 an opponent successful lands a called shot on you, you can dispel the 
pain. Doing so allows you to re-roll the resist, and you add your grace 
to the roll.
     




      Force of Self
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
      
      Resist: Spirit (negates)
      
      Your
 aura is so powerful that nobody can even come close to you. When you 
enter this stance, anybody attempting to step into an adjacent space to 
you must make a successful resist. If they cannot make the resist, they 
can spend another action point in order to try again. If somebody is 
already standing next to you, they are unaffected. However, if you and 
anybody adjacent to you is separated, and they try to move next to you 
again, they must again succeed in rolling the resist.  You can 
allow allies to stand next to you.
     




      Inner Calm
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
      
      You
 center yourself, calming your emotions and focusing your mind. While 
you are in your Inner Calm stance, you cannot be disoriented. If you 
become disoriented while outside of this stance, you may enter this 
stance to end the disorientation.
     




      Iron Palm
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Cost: Unarmed Called Shot +1 AP
      
      When
 you hit the opponent, your attack sends ripples through their body, 
activating multiple called shot effects as if you had hit each one 
separately. When you make a called shot with your Iron Palm, your called
 shot affects multiple locations.
      
      Affects called shot and an adjacent location of your choice
      
      Affects called shot and two adjacent locations
      
      Affects called shot and any two called shot locations
      
      Affects called shot and any three called shot locations
      

      Master of Forms
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Requires: 6 skill points in Grace & 2 stances known
      
      You
 can enter multiple stances, gaining all of their effects. You can have 
one stance active per 3 skill points you have in Grace. You must enter 
each one separately (spending 1 action point for each stance). Of 
course, you cannot enter two mutually exclusive stances. For instance, 
if a stance says that you cannot move while in that stance, you cannot 
be in another stance that requires you to move every turn.
     




      Parting Waves
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Resist: Dexterity (negates)
      
      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
      
      Any
 time you successfully evade an attack from a melee weapon, you can 
reflexively spend 1 action points in order to disarm the opponent of the
 weapon they attacked you with. They must make a Dexterity resist 
against your skill in grace in order to keep their weapon. If they fail,
 the weapon clatters to their feet.
     




      Shocking Soul
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Requires: 9 skill points in Grace
      
      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
      
      If
 you are successfully struck by a melee attack, you can immediately 
channel the power of your soul through their weapon and into your 
assailant. The enemy takes 1 unsoakable damage per point you have in 
Grace.
     




      Spirit Break
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
      
      You
 focus your mind and your thoughts, reaching out to the people around 
you. Every time someone rolls their Spirit attribute within 25 feet of 
you, you may lower the result of the roll by your Grace.
      

      Spiritual Seal
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Cost: Attack +1 AP
      
      Your
 attack can seal the Spirit on another person, causing them to be unable
 to tap into their strength of will. The target of your attack takes a 
penalty on all of their Spirit skills (Faith, Grace, Luck, and 
Shamanism) and the Spirit attribute until the end of your next turn.
      
      -3
      
      -6
      
      -9
      
      -12
      

      Void Strike
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Resist: Spirit (as evade; see below)
      
      Cost: Melee Attack +1 AP
      
      You
 can guide your ki along the path of your strike, creating a sharp wave 
that rends through the target. Your melee attack can target those an 
additional 5 feet away from you per point you have in Grace. Because of 
the nature of this attack, the target may choose to use his Spirit in 
place of his evade in order to avoid the attack. If they have a poor 
Spirit, they may use their evade as per normal.
      


      p Ki-Unleashing Specialties M
      
      Ki Flow
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Resist: Brute or Spirit (negates, target’s discretion)
      
      Cost: 2 AP
      
      Through
 meditation and will, you have refined the control of your internal 
energy. Your Spirit strains against your flesh, manifesting itself in 
moments of duress. Enemies near you are pushed away from you when you 
manifest your ki flow.
      
      Enemies within 5 feet of you must resist being pushed away 5 feet.
      
      Enemies within 10 feet of you must resist being pushed away 5 feet.
      
      Enemies within 15 feet of you must make resist being pushed away 5 feet.
      
      Enemies within 20 feet of you must resist being pushed away 5 feet.
      

      Ki Rage
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Requires: Ki Flow specialty
      
      Cost: Ki Flow +1 AP (3 AP total)
      
      The
 ki pressure that surrounds you has taken on a life of its own. When you
 release your ki flow on the battlefield, it damages all enemies that 
are affected by it. In addition to being pushed back, they also take a 
few points of unsoakable damage.
      
      3 damage
      
      6 damage
      
      9 damage
      
      12 damage
      


      p Light-as-Air Specialties M
      
      Feather in the Wind
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Cost: 1 AP (as a normal move)
      
      You
 may move across the air, over water, and skip across lava as though you
 were completely weightless. When you move like this, you can only move 
your normal speed weightlessly, and it must be a horizontal direction 
(you cannot move upwards). You may spend your next action point to 
continue moving weightlessly, but during that brief second between 
moving weightlessly, your weight returns. If you are falling when you 
activate weightlessness, you remain falling, but can move your speed 
horizontally.
      
      Any 
penalties you have to speed (such as from armor or crippling attacks) 
affect your weightless speed.
     




      Weightless
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
      
      Requires: Feather in the Wind specialty
      
      When
 you are standing in a single spot, you can control your body’s weight 
so that it is at equilibrium with its surroundings. If you are on water 
in your Weightless stance, you will not sink. If you are in the air in 
your Weightless stance, you will not fall. If you stop moving 
weightlessly while in this stance (with your Feather in the Wind 
specialty), your weight does not return.
      
      If
 you are trying to enter this stance under duressed conditions (such as 
while falling), you may do so for 2 action points, and may do so 
reflexively.
      
      You 
cannot jump from a point that would not normally support your weight, 
such as from the surface of a pond or on the edge of a palm leaf.
      


      p Paralyzing Specialties M
      
      Touch of Paralysis
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Resist: Brute (negates)
      
      Cost: Unarmed Attack +2 AP
      
      You
 strike out at major nerve clusters and pressure points, twisting the 
target into a statue of agony. When you hit the target with Touch of 
Paralysis, you also roll to determine the tier. The target is allowed to
 resist against a roll of your Grace every time they would take damage 
from the paralysis, and, once successfully resisted, the effect ends. A 
person can be effected by only one Touch of Paralysis at any given time,
 with the greater result overtaking the previous.
      
      The target takes 1 point of damage every time they try to move.
      
      The target takes 3 points of damage every time they try to move.
      
      The target takes 5 points of damage every time they try to move.
      
      The target takes 7 points of damage every time they try to move.
      

      Blocked Ki
      
      Grace Specialty
      
      Requires: Touch of Paralysis specialty
      
      Resist: Brute or Spirit (target’s discretion, tiers down)
      
      Cost: Unarmed Attack +1 AP
      
      You
 strike one of your opponent’s chakra points, disrupting their natural 
energy flow. This causes a massive blockage that explodes in pain when 
the opponent makes even the slightest of movements. The opponent 
receives 1 point of unsoakable damage with each action point they spend.
 The opponent may spend the indicated amount of action point meditating,
 trying to unblock their blocked ki.
      
      1 AP to unblock the ki channel
      
      2 AP to unblock the ki channel
      
      3 AP to unblock the ki channel
      
      4 AP to unblock the ki channel
      










      Luck Skill
     



      Luck
 is everywhere. Everyone has it. Some people have phenomenal luck, 
others are commonly out on their luck. You, however, know how to make 
your own luck. Now, it’s often a gamble, but when you win, you win big. 
Lucky people manipulate their own fate, sticking their necks on the line
 and hoping to persevere. The winners become the best, and the losers, 
well, they often die.
     







      Confident in your Luck
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 know the odds. You know that you’re oozing out good luck. When you so 
choose, you may use your skill in Luck in place of any other resist. Is 
somebody trying to push you around and you need a Brute resist to get 
out of it? Just spend 1 action point to use your skill in Luck in place 
of your Brute attribute.
     







      Don’t Tell Me the Odds
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 refuse to accept a bad hand dealt by fate and push on to succeed. You 
can spend 1 action point reflexively to get a +1 on any roll, but you 
can only use it if the bonus will raise your roll high enough that it 
will reach a higher tier result. This bonus increases by +1 for every 10
 points you have in Luck.
     







      Cheat Fate
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Using
 your natural luck, you are able to prevent certain outcomes from being 
rolled. When you enter this stance, choose a single number from 2 to 11.
 If anybody near you rolls the number you chose, they must re-roll it. 
If the same number is rolled on the re-roll, it is kept.
     







      Equalizing Force
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      Luck
 is the great balancer, bringing good luck to the misfortunate and bad 
luck to the fortunate. You can use Equalizing Force whenever you see 
somebody roll a die. For 2 action points, you change the die rolled to a
 6.
     



      If
 the target had rolled a 12, the 12 is now a 6 but they roll again and 
add the results. If they had rolled a 1, it is now a 6, but they can’t 
add any of their bonuses to the 6. Now, a 6 is a 6 is a 6. This 
specialty cannot be used to alter wound effect or fatal effect rolls or 
any roll that requires a random die roll.
     







      Hex
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity or Spirit (target’s discretion, negates)
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      When
 your enemies are moving toward you, there’s always some loose piece of 
rubble or a stray twig that trips them up. For 2 action points, when 
anybody is moving directly toward you and is within 25 feet, you can 
cause them to trip. They make an opposed resist against your luck roll. 
If you meet or exceed their resist, they fall to the ground and are 
prone (normally costing an action point to stand up).
     







      Jackpot
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Luck
     



      Lucky
 hits are rare to find, so you squeeze them for all their worth. When 
rolling strike or accuracy to determine damage, increase your damage 
class by 2 every time you roll a pure 12. This damage class increase 
only affects the one attack.
     







      Jinx
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Any
 time you are attacked, you can jinx that opponent. To do so, you 
willingly take a 1 on the evade and defense rolls of the incoming 
attack, letting them land a full blow against you. You can only choose 
to do this if you would have gained the full bonuses to your evade and 
defense in the first place. Your attacker is now jinxed. The next time 
they are attacked (be it from you or an ally), you may add your skill in
 Luck to either the accuracy or strike roll.
     







      Roll of the Dice
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Requires: Any 1 other specialty from the Luck skill
     



      The
 fates of fortune seem drawn to you, giving you every opportunity to 
take a gamble. At the beginning of your turn you can make one free roll 
for the sole purpose of activating one of your other luck specialties. 
Dice rolled this way can be stored without spending action points.
     







      Roulette
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Cost: Attack +1 AP
     



      The
 more you’re willing to risk, the greater the rewards. When you announce
 your attack choose a number ranging from 1 through 12. Now roll your 
die without adding anything to it. If you get that number or higher, you
 get the number you chose as a bonus on your accuracy roll. If you get 
under that number, you resolve the attack as per normal.
     











      Spot of Misfortune
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Luck
     



      Resist: Spirit (negates)
     



      Cost: 2 AP to create, 1 AP reflexively to enact
     



      You
 know when an area is filled with bad luck. Choose a 5 foot spot within 
25 feet of you. Any time somebody makes a combat roll (accuracy, evade, 
strike, or defense) while in that spot, you may spend 1 action point to 
cause them to take a 1 on that roll. They can resist with their Spirit 
opposed by your skill in Luck.
     



      When
 you use Spot of Misfortune on an opponent, they get a feeling that 
they’re standing in an unlucky location. You can make one such location 
for every 3 points you have in Luck.
     



      You
 can create a Spot of Misfortune inside a vehicle only if the vehicle 
has a cockpit larger than 10 feet by 10 feet. Otherwise, the vehicle is 
simply inside the spot of misfortune and can move out of it.
     











      p Failure Avoidance Specialties M
     



      Free from Failure
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Requires: 6 skill points in Luck
     



      While
 you might still do poorly, you have confidence that you’ll never fail 
completely. While in this stance, your natural 1s are not 1s. You may 
still add appropriate bonuses to rolls of 1. You may only do this if you
 rolled the 1 - having a specialty or effect that causes you to take an 
effective 1 can’t be affected by Free from Failure.
     







      Steady Friends
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Requires: 10 skill points in Luck & Free from Failure specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Your
 confidence extends to your friends and allies. When an ally within 25 
feet rolls a natural 1 and you are in your Free from Failure stance, you
 may allow your ally to add their normal bonuses to the natural 1.
     











      p Foul Luck Specialties M
     



      Curse
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Resist: Spirit (negates)
     



      Cost: 1 AP to store, 1 AP reflexively to use
     



      Your
 streaks of bad luck cause people to avoid you for fear of your bad 
vibes rubbing off onto them. When you roll a 1 in combat, you may spend 1
 action point to save that roll. Your roll remains a natural 1.
     



      You
 may spend one action point to give another person within 50 feet the 
same result. They roll their Spirit against your skill in Luck to resist
 this effect. You may store a number of 1s equal to 1 plus 1 per 3 skill
 points you have in Luck. These 1s are stored until your next breather 
and may only be used on any dice rolled during combat.
     







      Fumble
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Requires: Curse specialty
     



      Resist: Spirit (negates)
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Your
 foe gets overly excited and drops their weapon before they’re even able
 to deliver an attack. When you’ve stored natural 1s with Curse, you can
 spend an action point and one of your stored natural 1s to roll your 
Luck against a target within 25 feet. If they fail to resist, they drop 
their weapon as if they had been disarmed.
     







      p Luck Holder Specialties M
     



      Ace Up My Sleeve
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively to grab the die, 1 AP to use
     



      You’ve
 become strategic in your use of luck. You’re able to store your 
successes and use them at more opportune times. Any time you roll a pure
 12 on a combat roll, you can store it. To do this you must leave the 
die where it landed with the 12 showing and announce to the table that 
you are storing that pure 12. You then re-roll for the roll that you 
saved the die on.
     



      You can use a saved pure 12 on any combat roll.
     



      You
 must use the saved pure 12 before your next breather. You can save one 
pure 12, plus an additional pure 12 per 4 skill points you have in luck.
     







      Leading the Lucky Life
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Requires: Ace Up My Sleeve specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      You
 cash in on your saved fortune for a rush of revitalizing energy. When 
using Ace Up My Sleeve to store pure 12s, you can instead use 1 action 
point to remove one of your saved 12s and roll your Luck to restore your
 hit points.
     



      You restore 7 hit points
     



      You restore 14 hit points
     



      You restore 21 hit points
     



      You restore 28 hit points
     







      Second Chance
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Requires: Ace Up My Sleeve specialty
     



      Resist: Spirit (negates)
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      When
 things look their darkest you always seem to luck out of the deadly 
blows. When hit by an attack which would normally give you a fatal 
effect and you’ve stored a pure 12 with Ace Up My Sleeve, you can spend 1
 reflexive action point and a stored 12 to receive a wound effect 
instead of receiving the fatal effect. The attacker may roll a Spirit 
resist to negate this effect.
     











      p Lucky #7 Specialties M
     



      Lucky Number 7
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 have a habit of getting twice as many pure rolls as anyone else. Any 
time your die rolls a 7, it becomes a “pure 7,” and you may roll again 
and add the results. Fancy that!
     



      Luckier Number 7
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Requires: Lucky Number 7 specialty & 16 skill points in Luck
     



      Not
 only are natural 7s lucky for you, they are overwhelmingly lucky. Now, 
when you are in your Lucky Number 7 stance and roll a 7, you can pick up
 the 7 and put it down as a 12. 7s equal 12s. And then you can re-roll 
them.
     











      p Ranged Evading Specialties M
     



      Feeling Lucky
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Resist: Spirit (tiers down)
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Ranged
 marksmanship and archery weapons have a habit of not working when 
they’re used to kill you. Hopefully that luck continues. When being 
fired upon by a ranged weapon, the opponent is allowed to resist. If 
they fail, roll your tier to determine the ill effect that happens to 
them.
     



      You roll twice on your evade and take the highest result.
     



      The weapon fails to fire.
     



      The
 weapon fails to fire and the ammo is destroyed. The weapon must be 
readied again, if applicable.
     



      The weapon backfires, dealing tier 1 damage to the user.
     







      Unfriendly Fire
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Requires: Feeling Lucky specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates)
     



      Cost: 2 AP reflexively
     



      Sometimes
 your enemies miss you. Sometimes their guns misfire. Sometimes they 
explode in their hands. And sometimes your enemies accidentally shoot 
each other. This specialty makes the latter happen more often.
     



      When
 you are shot at with a firearm, crossbow, or bow, you can attempt to 
make the attack Unfriendly Fire for 2 action points. Choose a target 
within 10 feet of you. They are the new target of the shot.
     



      The
 original attacker still determines if they hit against the new target’s
 evade, but you roll your Luck in order to determine what tier of damage
 is done. For every tier that the original attacker rolls their resist 
above tier 1, they lower the damage by 1 tier. The new target can 
attempt to soak damage, as per normal.
     



      If
 the attack was special (that is, had specialties modifying it), all of 
the specialty modifiers are lost and the attack becomes a normal attack.
 The original attacker keeps the extra action points required to make 
the attack special.
     







      Unfriendly Artillery
     



      Luck Specialty
     



      Requires: Feeling Lucky specialty & Unfriendly Fire specialty
     



      When
 you divert an attack into a new target through sheer luck alone, it has
 the potential to be very powerful. Your Unfriendly Fire no longer loses
 the specialty modifiers from the original attack, and the original 
attacker does not regain their action points from adding those specialty
 modifiers.
     
















      Shamanism Skill
     



      Shamanism
 is related to nature, the earth, and everything organic. The shaman 
stands out among the modern, industrial world as a return to archaic 
times. Shamanism sometimes represents a manipulation of the elements. 
Other times it is a use of animals to help further their causes. 
Regardless, those with skill in Shamanism will make a powerful and 
distinctive mark on any game.
     







      Control Beast
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      You are able to calm an animal and gain its loyalty. You may even be able to redirect its anger.
     



      If
 you attempt to use this ability on an animal under another shaman’s 
control, the owner and you must make opposed Shamanism rolls. If you 
succeed, you can attempt to control it. If you fail, nothing occurs.
     



      The animal becomes cautious, only attacking if forced
     



      The animal becomes passive and will not attack
     



      The animal becomes passive and willing to help you
     



      The
 animal becomes your ally, and will not attack you. You may direct it to
 attack another, at your discretion.
     







      Druidic
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Warped
 metal feels unnatural in your hand, and you’ve always felt more at home
 wielding your ancestral, tribal weaponry. When in this stance, wood and
 organic weapons (not including unarmed attacks) deal 2 damage classes 
higher.
     







      Fire Resistance
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Your
 natural body heat increases. Your love of the flame has begun to 
manifest as you become more and more resistant to fire. Any time you 
take damage from fire or a fire-based attack, you soak a fair deal of 
the damage.
     



      3 damage from heat or fire soaked
     



      6 damage from heat or fire soaked
     



      9 damage from heat or fire soaked
     



      12 damage from heat or fire soaked
     







      Geomancer
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Requires: Topographer specialty
     



      Choose
 an extreme terrain: jungle, desert, swamp, tundra, high atmosphere, or 
the abyss (deep underwater); or an extreme weather condition: raging 
thunderstorm, hurricane, tornado, blizzard, meteor shower, sand-storm, 
or heat wave. When fighting in these chosen conditions, you may use your
 skill in Shamanism in place of any tiered skill roll.
     







      Hardened Trainer
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Through
 years of dealing with animals, you are keen at fighting against them. 
When you are fending off an animal, you gain a bonus to your defense 
equal to your skill in Shamanism.
     



      Lion’s Roar
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Resist: Spirit (negates)
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      You
 breathe deeply and let out a mighty roar that strikes fear into the 
heart of all nearby enemies. When making such a warcry, all opponents 
within 50 feet who can hear you must roll a Spirit resist against your 
Shamanism. If they do not resist, they become frightened, suffering the 
effects of Tier 2 fear.
     







      Naturalist
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Requires: 5 skill points in Shamanism
     



      Coating
 yourself in metal makes you uneasy. You gain an additional soak class 
for every 5 skill points you have in Shamanism while wearing organic or 
wooden armor.
     







      Parasite
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Resist: Brute (tiers down)
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      By
 stomping in constant rhythm, you draw out nearby insect colonies to 
assault an opponent within 25 feet. On the turn the swarm attacks, and 
every turn thereafter, roll on the called shot chart. The victim must 
roll to resist against your Shamanism or suffer the effects of this 
called shot.
     



      Anything
 that would affect an area disrupts the swarm and it must be reformed 
(for 2 action points). If at any point you lose the ability to move your
 legs or are knocked prone, the swarm is disrupted.
     







      Still as Stone
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Stalking
 your prey like a crouched cougar, you wait for the exact correct moment
 to pounce, still as the world around you and blending in as if you were
 a part of the scene itself. Whether you’re in the quiet meadows and 
copses of the forest or a back-alley in the night, you can blend in with
 your surroundings perfectly while standing still. When you enter this 
stance, you gain a bonus equal to your skill in Shamanism to hide when 
you have cover.
     







      Tactics of the Wolf
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Cost: Melee Attack reflexively
     



      You’ve
 learned to approach combat like a pack of wolves attacking their prey: 
all at once. When somebody attacks an adjacent opponent, you can make a 
reflexive attack against that opponent. If you hit, you gain a bonus on 
your strike.
     



      You gain +3 on the strike roll
     



      You gain +6 on the strike roll
     



      You gain +9 on the strike roll
     



      You gain +12 on the strike roll
     







      Topographer
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Be
 it hurricane, heatwave, blizzard, or sleet, you are able to function in
 all weather conditions without penalty. In addition, you take no 
penalties for moving through rough or unsafe terrain.
     



















































      p Bird Calling Specialties M
     



      Avian Wrath
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      Raising
 your hands above you and whistling, you call down death from above. 
Native animals dive down and attack your victim, a victim who can be up 
to 50 feet away. Depending on your surroundings, these creatures might 
be fish, bats, birds, or even insects, though they’re never larger than a
 human’s fist. When you first call the animals, you must make an 
accuracy roll against the target’s evade (just like a normal attack). If
 you hit them with your summoned avians, they deal damage as per the 
tiers below. This damage can be soaked.
     



      Anything
 that would affect an area (such as an explosion or gas) disrupts the 
swarm (forcing you to start over, if you so desire). If at any point you
 lose the ability to speak, the swarm is disrupted. You may not talk 
while continuing an Avian Wrath or use any specialties requiring the use
 of your voice.
     



      Animals deal 6 initial damage, 3 damage when continued
     



      Animals deal 12 initial damage, 6 damage when continued
     



      Animals deal 18 initial damage, 9 damage when continued
     



      Animals deal 24 initial damage, 12 damage when continued
     







      Blacken the Sky
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Requires: Avian Wrath specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      When
 using Avian Wrath, the swarm of squaking animals becomes so dense that 
it distracts your foe. Every turn an opponent is hit by your Avian 
Wrath, they must resist against your Shamanism or be disoriented (losing
 1 action point). Once your Avian Wrath stops, they become re-oriented.
     







      Pitch Black
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Requires: Avian Wrath & Blacken the Sky specialties
     



      When
 using Avian Wrath, your swarm becomes so thick and fast that it blocks 
out all light around your victim. The victim is now blinded while they 
remain the target of the Avian Wrath.
     











      p Chemical Immunity Specialties M
     



      Venom Immunity
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Being
 stung, being bitten, having venom injected into your body: these things
 used to be a big deal, but they’re less worrisome nowadays. When you 
are attempting to resist a poison, add your skill in Shamanism to the 
resist roll.
     







      Alchemical Resistance
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Requires: Venom Immunity specialty
     



      You’ve
 trained your body to ward off venoms, both natural and unnatural. When 
resisting any alchemical substances (gases, acids, poisons, et cetera), 
add your skill in Shamanism to the roll.
     







      p Protective Swarm Specialties M
     



      Protect the Monarch
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      By
 vibrating your vocal cords, you trigger a defense mechanism in nearby 
creatures that swarm you, protecting you from harm. As with all swarms, 
these are creatures native to the terrain ranging from fishes to small 
woodland creatures and even insects, though they are never larger than a
 fist.
     



      Anything
 that would affect an area disrupts the swarm and it must be reformed 
again (costing 2 action points). If at any point you lose the ability to
 speak, the swarm is disrupted. You may not talk while continuing a 
Protect the Monarch or use any specialties requiring you to use your 
voice. You may only be covered in one swarm at a time.
     



      +1 soak class
     



      +2 soak class
     



      +3 soak class
     



      +4 soak class
     







      Devoted Drones
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Requires: Protect the Monarch specialty
     



      The
 swarm covering your body is willing to die in order to protect you. 
When using Protect the Monarch, the swarm is only disrupted when 
dismissed (such as when you stop spending action points on it) or until 
your next breather.
     







      Hive Exodus
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Requires: Protect the Monarch specialty
     



      Be
 it from lifting you up into the air or dragging you across the 
battlefield, each turn you spend with Protect the Monarch active, your 
swarm may move you in any direction. If moved into the air the swarm 
maintains you there each turn until disturbed.
     



      You are moved 5 feet
     



      You are moved 10 feet
     



      You are moved 15 feet
     



      You are moved 20 feet
     











      p Swarming Insect Specialties M
     



      Colony of One
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Resist: Brute or Dexterity (negates, as per a grab)
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      By
 humming at a very low frequency, you are able to call a swarm of native
 insects or animals to overwhelm your victim and hold them in place. 
These creatures can be anything smaller than your fist and native to the
 area. The swarm uses your accuracy when making a grab against its 
target no farther than 50 feet away. In order for the victim to break 
free they must roll resist against your skill in shamanism (using their 
brute or dexterity).
     



      Anything
 that would affect an area (such as an explosion or gas) disrupts the 
swarm (forcing you to start over, if you so desire). If at any point you
 lose the ability to speak, the swarm is disrupted. You may not talk 
while continuing a colony of one or use any specialties requiring the 
use of your voice.
     



      The swarm grabs one called shot location
     



      The swarm grabs one called shot location
     



      The swarm grabs two called shot locations
     



      The swarm grabs two called shot locations
     







      Drag Down
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Requires: Colony of One specialty
     



      Resist: Brute (negates)
     



      The
 vermin swarm pulls its opponents to the ground. Any foe successfully 
grabbed by your Colony of One is also brought prone unless they can make
 a brute resist against your Shamanism.
     







      Hive Mind
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Requires: Colony of One specialty
     



      When
 continuing a swarm, it is no longer disrupted when you are knocked 
prone or rendered unable to speak. This means you may now freely speak 
and use specialties requiring speech without having to call out your 
swarms again.
     







      Pressure Cooker
     



      Shamanism Specialty
     



      Requires: Colony of One specialty
     



      The
 swarm of creatures holding down the victim begins to move rapidly, 
cooking them with sheer friction. Each turn after grabbing a target with
 colony of one, a point or more of unsoakable damage is dealt to the 
target.
     



      Takes 1 unsoakable damage
     



      Takes 2 unsoakable damage
     



      Takes 3 unsoakable damage
     



      Takes 4 unsoakable damage
     
















      Chapter 10 - Sciences
     



      The
 Sciences attribute represents a character’s proficiency to make items, 
invent new items, and utilize their creations in ways better than anyone
 else can. Knowledge in the sciences will give you information of the 
world, allowing you to deduct what are the elements in a serum, take 
apart and reassemble an advanced firearm, and use general book knowledge
 to solve a number of riddles.
     







      What can you do with your Sciences attribute?
     







      Disassemble
     



      Through
 your experience crafting, it’s also taught you how to break things 
down. Disassembling will often be used for traps and mines, to prevent 
their activation.
     



      You can disassemble small, practical things, such as a clock or door.
     



      You can disassemble a simple trap or item (Marque I or II).
     



      You can disassemble a complicated trap or item (Marque III).
     



      You can disassemble a clever trap or item (Marque IV).
     







      Understand
     



      Because
 of your knowledge of science, you have a knack for comprehending what 
an item does and the purpose it serves. If you see an item, you can 
attempt to ascertain what it does.
     



      You can understand what its basic function is, but none of its augments.
     



      You can determine its basic functions and Marque I augments.
     



      You can determine its basic functions and up to Marque II augments.
     



      You can determine its basic functions and all augments up to Marque III.
     







      Crafting
     



      Though
 each of the six crafting science skills are certainly different, they 
each utilize a similar system. This crafting system works on a few key 
principles: downtime, augments, and marques. All crafting occurs during 
downtime, when the game is otherwise not running and the character is 
left to his own devices. If the game goes a couple days without any 
major plot unfolding, that’s downtime.
     



      Let’s
 say that your party’s armsmith, Isabella, wants to craft herself a nice
 sword. She has 8 points in her Armsmith skill and the Weapon Smith 
specialty, so she can craft a sword with three slots. She applies the 
augments accurate and reach to the weapon (each of which being one 
slot). Because she has 8 points in the skill, they are all Marque II. 
That means her accurate augment gives the sword a +2 on accuracy rolls, 
and her reach augment extends the reach of the sword out by five feet 
(making it one long sword!).
     







      Learning Augments
     



      You
 gain augments by taking craft-oriented specialties. When you learn a 
specialty in crafting, sometimes you will gain a number of augments from
 the specialty. For each augment you gain in this way, choose one 
augment from any list that you have access to from a specialty. 
(Weaponsmith, for instance, gives you access to all of the Weaponsmith 
augments that you are eligible to learn.) Once you have learned an 
augment, you may place it on any item of its type that you craft. So, if
 you create a weapon, and you know the “Accurate” augment, any weapon 
you craft that has enough open slots may contain the “Accurate” augment.
 You can only place an augment on an item once (so a sword could not be 
augmented with “Accurate” multiple times).
     



      The
 fastest way to gain augments is to take the Learn Augments specialty on
 the next page.
     







      Do-It-Yourself
     



      Once
 you start taking crafting specialties, you’ll gain a DIY score. This 
“Do-It-Yourself” score tells you how many of your hand-crafted items you
 can keep on yourself at any given time without having to pay for the 
base materials.
     



      The
 items that you craft from your DIY score are shoddy, somewhat rugged 
items that you have pieced together over time. They’re not composed of 
the finest rifle-stock, the best wood, or the clockmaker’s finest gears.
 These are the items that you’ve simply figured out how to work and 
they’re the ones you keep with you.
     



      You
 can lend out items that you’ve crafted from your DIY score to your 
fellow adventurers and friends. However, because of the rickshaw nature 
of DIY-made items, they require constant upkeep. If one of your items is
 away from you for longer than a single period of downtime (that is, a 
couple days), it’ll stop working properly and become little more than 
useless scrap materials.
     



      You
 may craft items of a higher quality by purchasing them at the total 
cost of the item if it were one marque less than your current marque. 
The resulting item requires little maintenance and is of high quality. 
It has your marque, even though it cost less for you to craft. Items 
bought in this way are of selling quality. This kind of purchase can 
only be made in a place that can provide materials - consult your 
narrator.
     







      Augments & Marques
     



      Almost
 every item you can craft has a number of slots on it that you can place
 augments into. Most augments will only take up one slot, but some 
augments, called complex augments, are very powerful and take up 
multiple slots. Each augment will tell you how many slots it is worth 
just beneath its name.
     



      Augments
 often have four marques available to them - upgrades that make the 
augment more powerful as you gain skill in your craft. Marques are 
similar to tiers, except, instead of rolling, you simply look at your 
skill. If your skill falls within a certain range, that’ll be your 
marque. Consult the chart below.
     







      Crafting in your Downtime
     



      Crafting
 is something that takes time - you can’t just write it down on your 
character sheet and suddenly have a dozen poisonous chemicals. 
Unfortunately, real life (and that’s what we’re going for here, 
obviously) doesn’t work that way. Instead, crafting is done in your 
downtime.
     



      Downtime
 is loosely defined as all of the time you aren’t actively roleplaying 
your character or forced to do something. If your character has a couple
 days off, that’s downtime. If your character is on a voyage at sea for a
 couple months, that’s downtime. Setting up camp in a dangerous dungeon 
complex is not downtime - your character has no time to work on things 
and replenish his supplies.
     



      During
 downtime you can make new items, repair old ones, and refill your 
supplies. If you’re an alchemist that can have five potions at any given
 time, downtime will allow you to replenish those five potions.
     



      Downtime
 is subject to the narrator’s discretion and is a way for narrators to 
control the flow of time and the game. If you’re out of supplies and the
 warrior’s equipment is all broken, it might be time for some downtime 
to recuperate. Yet maybe you have a very brief amount of downtime and 
your narrator decides that you have enough time to replenish two of your
 potions, but not all of them. That’s at your narrator’s discretion.
     







      Specialties
     



      Learn Augments
     



      General Crafting Specialty
     



      You learn the granted augments. You can take this specialty multiple times.
     







      Nothing up my Sleeve
     



      General Crafting Specialty
     



      You
 are known for always having the right item for the right job. At any 
given moment, you can craft an item on the fly, acting as though you 
already had it. It must be concealable (thus, you can’t just pull a tank
 or heavy rifle out of your pocket). You can only do this once between 
downtimes, and the item must be something you know how to craft (as in, 
you have taken the basic crafting specialty for the item and any 
augments you are going to put on it).
     







      The Cost of Prototyping
     



      Many
 inventors can produce beta objects: creations that exceed the normal 
augment limit of 3. These beta designs, however, are so difficult to use
 that only the original inventor can typically control them. But while 
many crafters can build betas, very few can build prototypes. Prototypes
 are objects that exceed the typical augment limit of 3 but that anybody
 can use.
     



      The
 materials cost for creating the extra augments for prototypes is the 
same as it always is. However, because prototypes are so rare, those who
 create them will typically inflate the price for the extra effort and 
skill required to craft the items. When buying off the market, the extra
 2 augments that prototypes allow will often be double the price of the 
normal 3 augment item.
     











      c Augments with the Same Name c
     







      Sometimes,
 you’ll find an “Accurate” augment under bow augments and an “Accurate” 
augment under weapon augments. They might have slightly different flavor
 text, but they do the exact same thing. Well, if you learn one, you’ve 
learned the other.
     



      Anytime
 you learn an augment, you know that augment regardless of which section
 of the book it falls under. If you learn how to craft firearms, 
crossbows, bows, and melee weapons, there is no need to learn the 
“Damaging” augment 4 different times. Just learn it once, and you’re 
good to go!
     












      Alchemy Skill
     



      Alchemy
 allows a person to create everything from basic acid to chemical 
weaponry. Alchemy uses chemicals to create a variety of potent 
solutions. Chemical weapons have gone into rapid development over the 
past fifty years, yet the usage of poisons, medicinal potions, and 
numerous other alchemic substances has been around for centuries. An 
alchemist can bring great diversity to any group, being most noteworthy 
for his or her healing abilities. Beyond medicinal, alchemist have a 
wide repertoire of explosives, corrosives, gases, and poisons. This is 
not a person you want to see on a bad day.
     











      Using Potions
     



      Potions
 find themselves being thrown around combat in all sorts of ways: a 
friendly toss to an ally, a deadly throw at an opponent, jabbed down 
someone’s throat, smashed into the ground at your feet, or poured over a
 wound. Here are some basic rules for using potions.
     







      Drawing & Drinking c
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Drawing
 and drinking a potion can be one smooth action that costs one action 
point. It does leave you open to melee reflexes: reflexive attack, 
reflexive called shot to the lower arm (disarm), or a reflexive called 
shot to the wielded item (sunder, this time to the potion). Be careful 
of drinking in combat!
     







      Throwing c
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      You
 may throw a potion at an enemy. You must have already drawn the weapon 
in order to do so. Attacking somebody with it requires 2 AP, and it 
deals damage as an unarmed weapon. Potions have a range of 25 feet.
     



      If
 you miss with a potion, it lands nearby and breaks. The narrator will 
determine if it lands on the space the enemy was in or near them.
     



      You
 can also toss a potion to an ally. This works in much the same way, 
except you need not roll accuracy and evade - unless, of course, the 
ally doesn’t want it! (For the ally to catch the toss, they must have 
one hand free, but it doesn’t cost any action points. They can drink it 
for 1 action point, as per normal, but may do so reflexively when they 
catch it.)
     







      Applying Poison to a Weapon c
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      You
 can apply a poison to a weapon for 3 action points. Doing so coats the 
weapon. The first time that the weapon deals damage (after damage soak),
 the poison is used. You can’t coat a bullet with a poison, and a weapon
 can only be coated in one poison at a time.
     







      p Immunity Specialties M
     



      Self-Made Immunity
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: Either Acid Brewer, Gas Brewer, or Poison Brewer specialty
     



      Due
 to prolonged exposures with your chemicals, your body has become immune
 to all of your harmful concoctions. Any harmful potions that you 
create, including contact poisons, can no longer harm you.
     







      Immunizations
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: Self-Made Immunity specialty
     



      You
 can brew your potions based on your friend’s chemical makeup, ensuring 
that they are also immune to your harmful concoctions. During any 
breather (a period of 15 minutes or more), you can immunize an ally 
against your harmful potions. From that point on, they are immune to any
 potions that you create until you specify that they are not. You can 
also designate potions against which they are not immune.
     











      p On-the-Fly Specialties M
     



      On-the-Fly Brewer
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP per augment slot
     



      You
 carry many of your basic chemicals on you and can mix them during the 
heat of battle to create that all-so-necessary potion. You can create 
any potion On-the-Fly as long as you have some basic chemicals on you. 
You can never have any more of your own potions brewed than your DIY 
score would allow. You may divide the action points spent brewing your 
potions over as many turns as you would like. Augments that do not have a
 slot cost require only 1 action point to be put in the potion.
     







      Expiration
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: On-the-Fly Brewer specialty
     



      Any
 of the chemicals that you brew On-the-Fly can be brewed with an 
expiration time. The potion may either activate upon expiring or become a
 dud. If you set the potion to activate, acids will eat through the 
vial, and gases will be automatically released. Once the dud potion 
expires, it’s little more useful than water (and fails to even provide 
the hydrating benefits of water).
     



      You
 may set the potion to expire within up to 5 turns. The potion will 
expire at the end of your turn, based on the number of turns set.
     







      Herbalist
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: On-the-Fly Brewer specialty
     



      The
 world is your chemistry set. You have no need for urban chemicals, and 
can create your potions with only those things found in the wild. Lost 
in the forest? The herbs will provide everything you need. Stuck in a 
dank dungeon? Look for an underground stream and some moss. You can use 
On-the-Fly Brewer without any need for basic chemicals, and can do so 
almost anywhere.
     







      Rapid Mixer
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: On-the-Fly Brewer specialty
     



      Cost: 1 AP per augment slot
     



      You
 have little need for pre-prepared potions. You can now brew potions 
On-the-Fly for only 1 action point per augment slot used in the potion. 
Augments that cost 0 slots on the potion may be placed on the potion for
 no action point cost.
     







      Walking Chemical Plant
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: On-the-Fly Brewer & Expiration specialty
     



      You
 can brew potions well past your normal DIY score. You may brew as many 
potions as you’d like; however, all potions you brew past your DIY limit
 expire and become duds within a number of turns after you brew them. 
(At your discretion, you can cause them to expire earlier.)
     



      Expires at the end of your next turn
     



      Expires up to 2 turns later
     



      Expires up to 3 turns later
     



      Expires up to 4 turns later
     











      p General Alchemy Augments M
     



      These are augments that, once learned, can be placed on almost any acid, gas, medicine, or poison.
     







      Contact
     



      General Alchemical Augment
     



      The
 potion seeps through skin and armor, going straight into the 
bloodstream. You can now simply throw the vial at an ally in order for 
the potion to affect them. They do not need to catch it and drink it 
themselves.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in alchemy.
     







      Solid
     



      General Alchemical Augment
     



      You
 develop your alchemical substances as a pill or small glob with a 
protective coating. The substance takes on a solid state, so that it can
 exist underwater or in other liquids. It will stay that way until 
broken.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in alchemy.
     







      Acid Brewer
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      When
 we say acids, we’re not talking about citrus-based cleaning supplies. 
We’re talking about acids that eat through metals within seconds, acids 
that burn skin, and acids that reduce the iron of a sword to its 
original form. You can now brew acids.
     



      Acids are often used to attack a single person.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can brew and maintain several acids based on 
your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These acids can then be 
upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty 
which can be selected under “acid augments” below. These augments have 
marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. As your 
skill in Alchemy improves, your marques will increase. See the 
“Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 acid can be upgraded with 3 augments. Sometimes an augment will take up
 multiple augment slots. For example, the “flesh burner” augment is 
worth 2 slots, so an acid only has 1 more available slot for an augment 
after “flesh burner” has been applied.
     







      Resisting Acids z
     



      All
 acids can be resisted with a Brute roll. For every tier of Brute rolled
 above Tier 1, the marque of the acid is reduced by 1.
     







      Number of Acids you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy chemicals, you can brew some acids entirely out of 
scraps. These acids must be constantly maintained by you and stop 
working soon after leaving your care. You can build and maintain a 
number of acids based on your DIY score. You can brew new acids or 
augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Acids z
     



      If you need to brew an acid that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are brewing the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the same
 as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the material
 cost for a Marque III augment is the market price fo a Marque II 
augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 6 dukes.
     







      Beta Acids
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Alchemy & Acid Brewer specialty
     



      Your
 acids go far beyond what most other chemists dream of, yet they are 
difficult for most people to use. Such acids have two more slots for you
 to place augments into.
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta acids, they 
must succeed in rolling a science result one tier higher than the 
highest level marque you have on your acid. If your acid has a Marque IV
 augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can somehow 
obtain a tier result of 5 with their science attribute).
     







      Prototype Acids
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Alchemy, Acid Brewer, & Beta Acids specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta acids and made them user-friendly. Now anybody can 
use an acid that you designate as being a prototype.
     







      p Acid Augments M
     



      Burns
     



      Acid Augment
     



      This acid burns the skin of the person it is thrown on. This is resistable and goes away after taking a breather.
     



      Tier 1 burns (giving you a -1 on defense rolls)
     



      Tier 2 burns (giving you a -3 on defense rolls)
     



      Tier 3 burns (giving you a -5 on defense rolls)
     



      Tier 4 burns (giving you a -7 on defense rolls)
     







      Flesh Burner
     



      Acid Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Acid
     



      Flesh
 burning acid damages living people and organic tissue. If used on a 
person, it deals damage to them. If simply thrown on somebody, it will 
lower the soak class of the person’s armor (and cannot be resisted). (If
 thrown on a person wearing organic armor, it will affect the armor 
first.) If a called shot is made to the person’s organic weapon (or 
another wielded item), it will lower the damage class of the weapon. If 
used on an organic trinket or gizmo of any sorts, it will render the 
item unusable until the item can be hammered out. Normally a weapon or 
armor can be banged back to its original form during a breather (15 
minutes or more).
     



      6 damage or a -1 to damage or soak class
     



      12 damage or a -2 to damage or soak class
     



      18 damage or a -3 to damage or soak class
     



      24 damage or a -4 to damage or soak class
     







      Metal Melter
     



      Acid Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Acid
     



      This
 melts away metals, causing them to lose their form and substance. If 
used on an automaton, metal vehicle, or somebody inexplicably made of 
metal, it deals damage to them. If simply thrown on somebody wearing 
armor, it will lower the soak class of the person’s armor (and cannot be
 resisted). (If thrown on a metal creation wearing armor, it will affect
 the armor first until the armor is gone.) If a called shot is made to 
the person’s weapon (or another wielded item), it will lower the damage 
class of the weapon. If used on a trinket or gizmo of any sorts, it will
 render the item unusable until the item can be hammered out. Normally a
 weapon or armor can be banged back to its original form during a 
breather (15 minutes or more).
     



      6 damage or a -1 to damage or soak class
     



      12 damage or a -2 to damage or soak class
     



      18 damage or a -3 to damage or soak class
     



      24 damage or a -4 to damage or soak class
     







      Rusting
     



      Acid Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Acid
     



      The
 acid rapidly begins to rust armor and washes out important lubrication,
 causing the armor to lock up. When an opponent is in medium or heavier 
metal armor, and is splashed with the acid, it begins to grind on 
itself, decreasing movement speed.
     



      -5 speed, -10 swim and climb speeds
     



      -10 speed, -10 swim and climb speeds
     



      -10 speed, -15 swim and climb speeds
     



      -15 speed, -15 swim and climb speeds
     







      Automatons and vehicles affected by the rusting augment take the penalty to regular speed only.
     



      Splash
     



      Acid Augment
     



      Your
 acids splash against multiple spots. The marque of this augment 
determines how many adjacent spaces the acid will splash into an effect.
     



      Affects 1 adjacent space
     



      Affects 2 adjacent spaces
     



      Affects 3 adjacent spaces
     



      Affects 4 adjacent spaces
     







      Thick Rust
     



      Acid Augment
     



      Requires: Rusting Augment
     



      The
 acid gets into the finer pieces of the armor, beginning to rust in even
 the smallest movements. The opponent takes a penalty to Dexterity and 
also must spend twice as many action points to get out of their armor. 
The armor can be cleaned out during the next breather.
     



      -3 Dexterity
     



      -6 Dexterity
     



      -9 Dexterity
     



      -12 Dexterity
     







      Wood Wrecker
     



      Acid Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Acid
     



      This
 melts away wood, causing it to lose its form and substance. If used on a
 wooden automaton, vehicle, or somebody inexplicably made of wood, it 
deals damage to them. If simply thrown on somebody wearing wooden armor,
 it will lower the soak class of the person’s armor (and cannot be 
resisted). (If thrown on a wooden creation wearing wooden armor, it will
 affect the armor first, until the armor is gone.) If a called shot is 
made to the person’s wooden weapon (or another wielded item), it will 
lower the damage class of the weapon. If used on a wooden trinket or 
gizmo of any sorts, it will render the item unusable until the item can 
be hammered out. Normally a weapon or armor can be banged back to its 
original form during a breather (15 minutes or more).
     



      6 damage or a -1 to damage or soak class
     



      12 damage or a -2 to damage or soak class
     



      18 damage or a -3 to damage or soak class
     



      24 damage or a -4 to damage or soak class
     







      Gas Brewer
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      You can whip up the most eye-bleeding, mouth-gagging, toxic gases around. You can now brew gases.
     



      Gases
 affect the space that the gas was released, and every adjacent space. 
Every turn, the gas has a chance of leaving, which the narrator will 
roll for at the end of the every turn after they throw it. The 
likelihood of the gas dissipating is based on how windy it is, with Tier
 1 being absolutely no wind (such as a small, airtight room) and Tier 4 
being a very windy area (such as during a storm or aboard a fast-flying 
ironbird). See the sidebar: Dispersing Gases.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can brew and maintain several gases based on 
your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These gases can then be 
upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, 
which can be selected under “gas augments” below. These augments have 
marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. As your 
skill in Alchemy improves, your marques will increase. See the 
“Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 gas can be upgraded with 3 augments. Sometimes an augment will take up 
multiple augment slots. For example, the “blinding” augment is worth 2 
slots, so a gas only has 1 more available slot for an augment after 
“blinding” has been applied.
     







      Resisting Gases z
     



      All gases can be resisted with a Brute roll. For every tier of Brute rolled above Tier 1, the marque of the gas is reduced by 1.
     







      Number of Gases you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy chemicals, you can brew some gases entirely out of 
scraps. These gases must be constantly maintained by you and stop 
working soon after leaving your care. You can build and maintain a 
number of gases based on your DIY score. You can brew new gases or 
augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Gases z
     



      If you need to brew a gas that you can’t create for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are brewing the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the same
 as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the material
 cost for a Marque III augment is the market price fo a Marque II 
augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 8 dukes.
     







      Beta Gases
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Alchemy & Gas Brewer specialty
     



      Your
 gases are much more lethal than most, yet they are difficult for most 
people to use. Such gases have two more slots for you to place augments 
into.
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta gases, they 
must succeed in rolling a science result one tier higher than the 
highest level marque you have on your gas. If your gas has a Marque IV 
augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can somehow 
obtain a tier result of 5 with their Sciences attribute).
     







      Dispersing Gases
     



      The
 conditions of the battlefield often determine the amount of time a gas 
can remain on the field without dispersing naturally. When determining 
if a gas is dispersed, the narrator rolls to determine whether or not 
the gas is dispersed, giving no special bonuses to the roll unless 
otherwise stated.
     



      Gases
 cannot be deployed underwater, and the conditions of wind have the 
greatest effect on the dispersing of gases. Each turn, the narrator 
rolls and must surpass the required roll based on the tier of the wind 
to determine if the gas remains.
     



      Tier 1        The gas will stay on a roll of 2 or higher. Tier 1 wind is stagnant air.
     



      Tier 2        The gas will stay on a roll of 5 or higher. Tier 2 wind is a breeze.
     



      Tier 3        The gas will stay on a roll of 9 or higher. Tier 3 wind is a gust.
     



      Tier 4        The gas will stay on a roll of 12 or higher. Tier 4 wind is a strong gust.
     







      Gases
 can also be dispersed by certain other forces. When something moves 
through the area, it will disperse the gas unless the narrator rolls a 5
 or more. If a bomb goes off in the gas, it will disperse the gas unless
 the narrator rolls a 9 or more. Gases with expirations disperse 
naturally or cannot be deployed when they expire.
     







      Prototype Gases
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Alchemy, Gas Brewer, & Beta Gases specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta gases and made them user-friendly. Now anybody can 
use a gas that you designate as being a prototype.
     







      p Gas Augments M
     



      Area of Effect
     



      Gas Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Gas
     



      Your gas affects more areas. You can, at your discretion, make the area of effect smaller than your normal marque allows.
     



      within 10 feet of the original space
     



      within 15 feet of the original space
     



      within 20 feet of the original space
     



      within 25 feet of the original space
     







      Arm Mutation
     



      Gas Augment
     



      Your
 gas causes the nerves in their arm to become unwound, for their flesh 
to warp, and for their arms to become largely unusable. If effected with
 an arm mutation, the target may resist with a resilience result one 
tier higher than the mark of this augment. Any time the target makes a 
roll that uses the arm, including accuracy and strike (and evade if they
 attempt to deflect), the target suffers a penalty on the roll. The 
mutation lasts for a number of turns based on the mark.
     



      -1 for 3 turns
     



      -2 for 4 turns
     



      -3 for 5 turns
     



      -4 for 6 turns
     







      Blinding
     



      Gas Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Gas
     



      A
 blinding chemical burns the eyes of everyone within the area of the 
gas, to the point where opening their eyes is painful. Those within the 
blinding area suffer a -4 on accuracy and evade rolls. People may leave 
the area of the gas, but they remain blinded for a number of turns 
afterwards based on the marque of this gas (though this is resistable).
     



      1 turn
     



      2 turns
     



      3 turns
     



      4 turns
     







      Corrosive
     



      Gas Augment
     



      A
 corrosive chemical weapon deals damage to everything it hits. They can 
melt skin, destroy lungs, or worse. The corrosive does hit point damage 
to every person inside, every time they end their turn inside the 
corrosive gas (though this is resistable).
     



      3 damage
     



      6 damage
     



      9 damage
     



      12 damage
     







      Confusing
     



      Gas Augment
     



      Confusing
 gas disorients the target, making them unable to make Cunning rolls. If
 the target fails to resist, they will automatically take a 1 on any 
Cunning rolls they make. Furthermore, the confused victim will be 
unaware of their own confusion, and will naturally default to Cunning if
 that is their highest attribute. Any person affected by the gas will 
remain in a confused state for a number of turns after leaving the gas 
(though this is resistable).
     



      1 turn
     



      2 turns
     



      3 turns
     



      4 turns
     







      Fogging
     



      Gas Augment
     



      A
 fogging gas blurs the vision of everyone within the area the weapon 
effects. Those within the fogging are effectively in poor lighting, 
suffering a -2 on accuracy and evade rolls. If somebody leaves the area 
they are no longer affected, or if somebody enters the area, they enter 
into the poor lighting. If somebody is trying to shoot through the 
fogging gas, they take the penalty as well.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in alchemy.
     







      Internal Burning
     



      Gas Augment
     



      This
 gas burns muscles of the target with every action they take. They take 
damage with every action point they spend until the internal burning 
exhausts (though this is resistable).
     



      They
 may choose, however, to forgo action points - that is, if they have 3 
action points for the turn, the target can wait for those 3 action 
points, and no damage will be done.
     



      1 damage for 3 action points
     



      2 damage for 4 action points
     



      3 damage for 5 action points
     



      4 damage for 6 action points
     







      Lingering
     



      Gas Augment
     



      Whatever
 you used, it stays where it was and continues to work its magic. If the
 narrator does not roll high enough for the gas to stay in the area, the
 narrator will re-roll. The narrator will do this a number of times 
based on the marque of the lingering.
     



      re-roll one time
     



      re-roll two times
     



      re-roll three times
     



      re-roll four times
     







      Luminescent Gas
     



      Gas Augment
     



      The
 gas coats the skin and clothes of those within its range and glows, 
causing them to have extreme difficulty hiding. Instead of the normal 
Brute resist, Luminescent is resisted by dexterity. Opponents who are 
already hidden are automatically forced to re-roll if they fail to 
entirely resist the luminescence, this time with the penalty.
     



      Luminescence
 will naturally wash off with water, after being in rain for 1 turn, or 
if the target can spend 12 action points brushing it off.
     



      -3 on sneaking and hiding rolls
     



      -6 on sneaking and hiding rolls
     



      -9 on sneaking and hiding rolls
     



      -12 on sneaking and hiding rolls
     







      Paranoia
     



      Gas Augment
     



      Takes up 3 Augment Slots on the Gas
     



      This
 chemical distresses the target and causes them to see things that 
aren’t there. Any affected by the paranoia must spend their next 
available action point (or two, if their only attack requires two action
 points) to attack the person closest to them, regardless of whether 
they are friend or foe. The paranoia makes the attack wild, however, and
 the targets suffer a penalty on their accuracy and strike rolls during 
this attack.
     



      Instead
 of the normal Brute resist, Cunning or Spirit can be used for the 
resist (at the target’s discretion).
     



      -3 on accuracy and strike rolls for the paranoia attack
     



      -2 on accuracy and strike rolls for the paranoia attack
     



      -1 on accuracy and strike rolls for the paranoia attack
     



      no penalty on the accuracy or strike rolls for the paranoia attack
     







      Replicating
     



      Gas Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Gas
     



      Replicating
 gases feed on death, spreading farther out with each victim it claims. 
Any time somebody dies in replicating gas, it feeds on the body to 
create more of itself, spreading out to affect everything within several
 adjacent areas of the original victim. It will continue to spread 
indefinitely.
     



      spreads to adjacent areas
     



      spreads to adjacent areas within 10 feet
     



      spreads to adjacent areas within 15 feet
     



      spreads to adjacent areas within 20 feet
     







      Slowing
     



      Gas Augment
     



      Those
 affected by your gas get stiff joints, feel frozen, instantly gain 
arthritis, or for some other reason can’t seem to move as fast as they 
once did. Their speed is reduced by the specified footage for three 
turns (though this reduction is resistable). They can never go below 5 
feet.
     



      5 feet speed reduction
     



      10 feet speed reduction
     



      15 feet speed reduction
     



      20 feet speed reduction
     







      Sticky
     



      Gas Augment
     



      This
 chemical weapon causes the victims to become sticky, slowing down their
 reflexes. The target suffers a penalty on evade rolls for three turns 
(though this penalty is resistable).
     



      -1 on evade rolls
     



      -2 on evade rolls
     



      -3 on evade rolls
     



      -4 on evade rolls
     







      Stunning
     



      Gas Augment
     



      Your
 targets are stunned when they get hit by this gas. They are stunned for
 the specified action points (though this is resistable).
     



      stunned for 1 action point
     



      stunned for 1 action point
     



      stunned for 2 action points
     



      stunned for 2 action points
     







      Thick
     



      Gas Augment
     



      This
 gas hugs the ground it’s released at. Winds in the area act as if 
they’re one tier lower when determining how long the gas lasts. In 
addition, if used on board a moving vehicle, the gas will sink onto the 
vehicle’s deck and move with the vehicle.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in alchemy.
     







      Medicine Brewer
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Medicinal
 potions are used to restore hit points, heal wounds, fight off poisons,
 and a variety of other beneficiary effects. All medicinal potions must 
be injected or ingested.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can brew and maintain several medicines based 
on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These medicines can then be 
upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, 
which can be selected under “medicine augments” below. These augments 
have marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. As 
your skill in Alchemy improves, your marques will increase. See the 
“Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 medicine can be upgraded with 3 augments. Sometimes an augment will 
take up multiple augment slots. For example, the “heavy push” augment is
 worth 3 slots, so a medicine has 0 available slot for an augment after 
“heavy push” has been applied.
     







      Number of Medicines you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy chemicals, you can brew some medicines entirely out of 
scraps. These medicines must be constantly maintained by you and stop 
working soon after leaving your care. You may build and maintain a 
number of medicines based on your DIY score. You may brew new medicines 
or augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Medicines z
     



      If you need to brew a medicines that you can’t create for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are brewing the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the same
 as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the material
 cost for a Marque III augment is the market price for a Marque II 
augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 8 dukes.
     







      Beta Medicines
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Alchemy & Medicine Brewer specialty
     



      While
 it is impossible for others to administer your medicines, they’re well 
worth the hassle. Your beta medicines have two more slots for you to 
place augments into.
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta medicines, they
 must succeed in rolling a science result one tier higher than the 
highest level marque you have on your medicine. If your medicine has a 
Marque IV augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can 
somehow obtain a tier result of 5 with their Sciences attribute).
     



      Prototype Medicines
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Alchemy, Medicine Brewer, & Beta Medicine specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta medicines and made them user-friendly. Now anybody 
can use a medicine that you designate as being a prototype.
     







      p Medicine Augments M
     



      Antitoxin
     



      Medicine Augment
     



      When
 you take an antitoxin, you gain a specified bonus against all poisons 
for the next hour. In addition, if you are currently poisoned, you may 
instantly reroll your resist against the poison with the bonus against 
it.
     



      +3
     



      +6
     



      +9
     



      +12
     







      Heavy Push
     



      Medicine Augment
     



      Takes up 3 Augment Slots on the Medicine
     



      While
 push stimulates the body to help it get over the beating it’s taken, 
heavy push takes it to a dangerous level. The muscles rip and the body 
cannot deal with the stress it’s being put under. This causes the heavy 
push to deal damage to the administrator, but gains action points 
instead. You can only use 1 extra action point per turn, and the damage 
is unsoakable. Any unused extra action points will go away during your 
next breather.
     



      10
 backlash damage for each additional action point used, up to 2 extra 
action points
     



      9
 backlash damage for each additional action point used, up to 3 extra 
action points
     



      7
 backlash damage for each additional action point used, up to 4 extra 
action points
     



      6
 backlash damage for each additional action point used, up to 5 extra 
action points
     







      Improved Push
     



      Medicine Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Medicine
     



      Requires: Push augment known
     



      Improved
 push takes your grandpappy’s old style push potions and gives them a 
jolt of electricity, making them push that much harder. Improved push 
potions return your hit points to you, though you cannot go over your 
maximum.
     



      restores 10 hit points
     



      restores 20 hit points
     



      restores 30 hit points
     



      restores 40 hit points
     







      Liquid Skin - Wound Healing
     



      Medicine Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Medicine
     



      Liquid
 skin instantly heals wounds damage. Healing this quickly, however, does
 so by infuriating the body’s natural regenerative system, and, made 
slightly wrong, can be very dangerous. When this is administered, the 
target rolls their die. If they receive a 1 on the twelve-sided die, 
they take the healing as damage.
     



      1 wound healed
     



      2 wounds healed
     



      3 wounds healed
     



      4 wounds healed
     







      Pain Reliever
     



      Medicine Augment
     



      Pain
 relieving medicines are designed to allow you to keep pushing on 
despite huge amounts of physical pain. When under the effects of 
painkillers you can ignore the wound effects 6-12 until your next 
breather.
     



      Can ignore 1 such wound effect
     



      Can ignore 2 such wound effects
     



      Can ignore 3 such wound effects
     



      Can ignore 4 such wound effects
     











      Push - Hit Point Regain
     



      Medicine Augment
     



      Push
 is a body stimulant that allows a person a boost in stamina, to ignore 
their wounds and to take a lot more punishment before falling. Push 
refills a person’s hit points, though it will not go over their maximum.
     



      Restores 4 hit points
     



      Restores 8 hit points
     



      Restores 12 hit points
     



      Restores 16 hit points
     







      SlowHeart
     



      Medicine Augment
     



      This
 potion slows the target’s heart, releases stress, and allows the person
 to relax and breath easily. If the target chooses, they may ignore the 
calming effects of SlowHeart, but if they go with the flow and slow down
 a little bit, their accuracy will improve. The bonus lasts until their 
next breather.
     



      +1
     



      +2
     



      +3
     



      +4
     







      Stimulant
     



      Medicine Augment
     



      This
 stimulant is used to forego fatigue. If you are exhausted, taking a 
stimulant will push off the fatigue for a number of hours as specified 
by the potion’s marque. Once a stimulant has been used, the fatigue 
returns after the designated amount of time and another stimulant will 
have no effect until you rest.
     



      2 hours
     



      4 hours
     



      8 hours
     



      24 hours
     







      Styptic
     



      Medicine Augment
     



      A
 styptic is a useful substance that, when poured on a wound, dries the 
blood and keeps it from bleeding. Any person that this is administered 
to stops bleeding and will not bleed from any wounds or attacks they 
have suffered up to this point.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in alchemy.
     







      Poison Brewer
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Poisons
 are rarely seen as the most savory tools of war; nonetheless, they 
remain ever popular. Poisons kill, disable, and bring great discomfort 
to those injected with them.
     



      Poisons
 are always a little difficult to find, requiring a tier 2 Cunning 
result to notice. A person can always volunteer to look at something to 
see if it is poisoned, such as trying to notice poison on a sword or in a
 drink.
     



      Poisons
 must either be consumed by the target or injected (as can happen on the
 battlefield, when a blade is coated in poison). The basic poison will 
activate within the target after the target has used 3 action points.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can brew and maintain several poisons based on 
your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These poisons can then be 
upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, 
which can be selected under “poison augments” below. These augments have
 marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. As your 
skill in Alchemy improves, your marques will increase. See the 
“Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 poison can be upgraded with 3 augments. Sometimes an augment will take 
up multiple augment slots. For example, the “hallucinogenic” augment is 
worth 2 slots, so a poison only has 1 available slot for an augment 
after “hallucinogenic” has been applied.
     



      Resisting Poisons z
     



      All
 poisons can be resisted with a Brute roll. For every tier of Brute 
rolled above Tier 1, the marque of the poison is reduced by 1.
     



      Number of Poisons you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy chemicals, you can brew some poisons entirely out of 
scraps. These poisons must be constantly maintained by you and stop 
working soon after leaving your care. You can brew and maintain a number
 of poisons based on your DIY score. You can brew new poisons or augment
 old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Poisons z
     



      If you need to brew a poison that you can’t create for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are brewing the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the same
 as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the material
 cost for a Marque III augment is the market price fo a Marque II 
augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 8 dukes.
     







      Beta Poisons
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Alchemy & Poison Brewer specialty
     



      Your poisons are difficult to use but oh-so-effective. Your beta poisons have two more slots for you to place augments into.
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta poisons, they 
must succeed in rolling a science result one tier higher than the 
highest level marque you have on your poisons. If your poison has a 
Marque IV augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can 
somehow obtain a tier result of 5 with their science attribute).
     



      Prototype Poisons
     



      Alchemy Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Alchemy, Poison Brewer, & Beta Poisons specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta poisons and made them user-friendly. Now anybody 
can use a poison that you designate as being a prototype.
     











      p Poison Augments M
     



      Anti-Toxin Suppressor
     



      Poison Augment
     



      Anti-toxin
 suppressors are built into poisons specifically to target anti-toxins. 
If an anti-toxin is used against a poison that has a suppressor brewed 
into it, the suppressor will entirely negate the effects of the 
anti-toxin unless the anti-toxin is one marque higher than the 
suppressor.
     



      Negates Marque I anti-toxins
     



      Negates Marque II anti-toxins
     



      Negates Marque III anti-toxins
     



      Negates Marque IV anti-toxins
     







      Blinding
     



      Poison Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Poison
     



      This
 poison blinds the person, causing them to temporarily lose their 
eyesight. Being blind causes the target to take a -4 on accuracy and 
evade rolls. It lasts for an amount of time based on the marque.
     



      2 turns
     



      4 turns
     



      6 turns
     



      8 turns
     







      Contortion
     



      Poison Augment
     



      Takes up 3 Augment Slots on the Poison
     



      The
 target’s body seizes up and they fall to the ground, prone. While 
prone, you suffer a -1 on all combat rolls (accuracy, evade, strike, and
 defense) and cannot move more than 5 feet per turn. The target cannot 
willingly stand from prone until the target has used or forgone a 
specified number of action points, and if somebody lifts them, they 
immediately fall back down.
     



      2 action points
     



      4 action points
     



      6 action points
     



      8 action points
     







      Disorienting
     



      Poison Augment
     



      A
 disorienting poison causes the person’s nerves to be shot, for them to 
swoon and be unable to focus. A disorienting poison disorients the 
target (causing them to lose 1 action point per turn) until the end of a
 specified number of turns.
     



      2 turn
     



      4 turns
     



      6 turns
     



      8 turns
     







      Dizzying
     



      Poison Augment
     



      This
 poison dizzies the target, causing them to waver and fail to walk in a 
straight line. While dizzied, the target’s speed is cut in half (rounded
 down). The dizzying effect lasts until the end of a specified number of
 turns.
     



      2 turns
     



      4 turns
     



      6 turns
     



      8 turns
     







      Hallucinogenic
     



      Poison Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Poison
     



      A
 hallucinogenic poison causes the brain to spaz out and see things that 
are definitely not there (or so we think). A hallucinogenic poison 
forces the target to make a cunning roll every time he wants to take an 
action. A failure causes the target to spend one action point moving 
aimlessly (at the narrator’s discretion).
     



      Tier 2 Cunning results required to move for 1 turn
     



      Tier 2 Cunning results required to make any actions for 2 turns
     



      Tier 3 Cunning results required to make any actions for 3 turns
     



      Tier 3 Cunning results required to make any actions for 4 turns
     







      Instant
     



      Poison Augment
     



      This
 poison now blossoms very quickly. Upon delivery being made, it occurs 
instantaneously. The poison acts as soon as it is delivered.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in alchemy.
     







      Irresistible
     



      Poison Augment
     



      When
 a poison is made irresistible, the Brute result required to resist the 
poison increases. Characters must act as if their Brute roll to resist 
the blast was one tier lower.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in alchemy.
     







      Painful
     



      Poison Augment
     



      Your
 poison does what poisons do best - it deals damage to their hit points.
 The painful augment does straight hit point damage (though it is 
resistable as per normal).
     



      6 damage
     



      12 damage
     



      18 damage
     



      24 damage
     







      Push-Back
     



      Poison Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Poison
     



      Push
 back is a rather devious poison used specifically to counter enemies 
who rely on push potions (that is, potions that restore their hit 
points). For the hour after somebody fails to resist a poison with 
push-back, any push potion they take will deal damage to them instead of
 restoring their hit points. The damage dealt is equal to the amount of 
hit points that would have been restored, but this is now resistable 
with your Brute.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in alchemy.
     







      Slow-Acting
     



      Poison Augment
     



      A
 slow-acting poison takes longer to occur and is therefore harder to 
trace back to the person who administered it. Within the scope of your 
marque, you determine when the effect kicks in. You make this decision 
when you create the poison, and cannot alter it thereafter.
     



      4 hours - 1 day
     



      3 hours - 3 days
     



      2 hours - 1 week
     



      1 hour - 1 month
     







      Stunning
     



      Poison Augment
     



      The
 poison stuns the opponent, causing the opponent to respond slowly and 
lose action points. The target is stunned for the specified amount of 
action points.
     



      1 action point stunned
     



      2 action points stunned
     



      3 action points stunned
     



      4 action points stunned
     







      Thirst
     



      Poison Augment
     



      The
 poison interacts with the water in the person’s body, making it almost 
impossible for the water to function normally. This quickly dehydrates 
the person, causing them to lose focus. Due to this, they take a penalty
 on accuracy and evade rolls until the end of three turns.
     



      -1 on accuracy and evade rolls
     



      -2 on accuracy and evade rolls
     



      -3 on accuracy and evade rolls
     



      -4 on accuracy and evade rolls
     







      Undetectable
     



      Poison Augment
     



      When a poison is made undetectable, the Cunning tier required to find it is increased.
     



      Tier 3 Cunning result
     



      Tier 3 Cunning result
     



      Tier 4 Cunning result
     



      Tier 4 Cunning result
     







      Armsmith Skill
     



      So
 you want to craft arms, do you? Do you have what it takes to create 
weapons, armor, firearms and everything else that you and your fellows 
will need to slay villains and save the land? Is it in you to sweat away
 your days creating items of war, giving birth to items of destruction? 
The Armsmith skill will allow you to do just that, creating all sorts of
 weapons, firearms, armors, and worse. Much, much worse.
     











      Belt Feeder
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP to begin, 1 AP to continue during subsequent turns
     



      You
 can feed in ammunition, allowing an adjacent gunman to keep firing 
without interruption. When you begin belt feeding, you select an 
adjacent ally. For that turn and every subsequent turn that you continue
 belt feeding (at the cost of 1 action point per turn), the targeted 
ally does not have to spend action points to ready their firearm. This 
only works on firearms that have a readying cost of 4 or less. If either
 you or your adjacent ally become separated, you must re-begin the belt 
feeding.
     







      Interchangeable Parts
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      Your
 weapons are designed so that their parts can be replaced and altered in
 the middle of battle. This gives the weapons additional slots for 
augments, but these augments are not always active. At any time, a 
person can switch out the augments for 3 action points, activating one 
augment but deactivating another augment. You may replace multiple 
augments at the same time all for the cost of 3 action points.
     



      This
 specialty works within the marque system. The amount of interchangeable
 slots the weapon has depends on the marque of its creator.
     



      1 interchangeable slot for an augment
     



      2 interchangeable slots for augments
     



      3 interchangeable slots for augments
     



      4 interchangeable slots for augments
     







      Rapid Replacements
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP (to replace) or 1 AP (to fix)
     



      Your
 sniper’s rifle just got snapped in two, and your brawler just got his 
chain cut in half. No worries - you’re there to help. For two action 
points, you can replace any broken weapon that you created (with the 
same weapon) as long as the current wielder is adjacent to you. 
Furthermore, if a weapon’s damage class has been lowered for any reason,
 you can return it to optimum efficiency for one action point.
     







      Temporary Attachments
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Cost: 1+ AP
     



      Suddenly,
 in the heat of battle, your friend wants his sword to be sheathed in 
fire. Normally that would be insane. For you, though, that requires 
surprisingly little effort. You can apply an augment you know to a 
weapon you or an adjacent ally are wielding for just 1 action point. If 
the augment takes up multiple augment slots, it costs that many action 
points to attach (so an augment that would take up 2 augment slots would
 cost 2 action points to attach). The temporary attachment doesn’t last 
long: it will stop functioning at the end of your next turn (when your 
action points refresh).
     



      The
 weapon you are attaching the temporary augment to does not need to have
 free augment slots: this is a bonus augment that does not fit into a 
weapon’s normal maximum number of augments.
     







      Weapon Support
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      You
 provide support repairs and guidance to adjacent allies on the 
battlefield, tweaking their weapons as they mow down opponents. Any ally
 using a weapon that you either created or augmented gains a bonus to 
their accuracy as long as they are adjacent to you while in your Weapon 
Support stance. The bonus is +1 plus an additional +1 per 4 skill points
 you have in Armsmith (so +2 at 4 skill points, +3 at 8 skill points, 
and so forth).
     



      If
 you have the Rapid Replacement specialty, an adjacent ally’s weapon 
cannot be broken so long as you remain adjacent to them and in the 
Weapon Support stance.
     







      Crafting Firearms & Crossbows
     



      Gunsmith
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      You
 can now create new firearms and upgrade them. These firearms can be of 
any size, type, or material. You can craft any firearm from the light 
peashooters to the super-heavy rifles.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several firearms based 
on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These firearms can then be 
upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, 
which can be selected under “firearm & crossbow augments” below. 
These augments have marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I
 augments. As your skill in Armsmith improves, your marques will 
increase. See the “Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for 
more information.
     



      Each
 firearm can be upgraded with 3 augments. Sometimes an augment will take
 up multiple augment slots. For example, the “damaging” augment is worth
 2 slots, so a firearm only has 1 more available slot for an augment 
after “damaging” has been applied.
     







      Number of Firearms you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some firearms entirely 
out of scraps. These firearms must be constantly maintained by you and 
stop working soon after leaving your care. You can build and maintain a 
number of firearms based on your DIY score. You can build new firearms 
or augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Firearms z
     



      If you need to build a firearm that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      A firearm will have a base materials cost. It is 1/5th the market price.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price for a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 5 princes.
     







      Beta Firearms
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Armsmith & Gunsmith specialty
     



      Your
 firearms are overly complex, but they can accomplish quite a bit. Such 
firearms have two more slots for you to place augments into.
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta firearms, they 
must succeed in rolling a science result one tier higher than the 
highest level marque you have on your firearm. If your firearm has a 
Marque IV augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can 
somehow obtain a tier result of 5 with their Sciences attribute).
     







      Prototype Firearms
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Armsmith, Gunsmith, & Beta Firearms specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta firearms and made them user-friendly. Now anybody 
can use a firearm that you designate as being a prototype.
     







      Crossbow Craftsman
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      You
 can now create new crossbows and upgrade them. These crossbows can be 
of any size, type, or material. You can craft any crossbow from the 
light hand-crossbow to the super-heavy ballistas.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several crossbows based 
on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These crossbows can then be 
upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, 
which can be selected under “firearm & crossbow augments” below. 
These augments have marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I
 augments. As your skill in Armsmith improves, your marques will 
increase. See the “Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for 
more information.
     



      Each
 crossbow can be upgraded with 3 augments. Sometimes an augment will 
take up multiple augment slots. For example, the “damaging” augment is 
worth 2 slots, so a crossbow only has 1 more available slot for an 
augment after “damaging” has been applied.
     







      Number of Crossbows you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some crossbows entirely 
out of scraps. These crossbows must be constantly maintained by you and 
stop working soon after leaving your care. You can build and maintain a 
number of crossbows based on your DIY score. You can build new crossbows
 or augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Crossbows z
     



      If you need to build a crossbows that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      A crossbow will have a base materials cost. It is 1/5th the market price.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price for a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 5 princes.
     







      Beta Crossbows
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Armsmith & Crossbow Crafter specialty
     



      Your
 crossbows are overly complex, but they can accomplish quite a bit. Such
 crossbows have two more slots for you to place augments into.
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta crossbows, they
 must succeed in rolling a science result one tier higher than the 
highest level marque you have on your crossbow. If your crossbow has a 
Marque IV augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can 
somehow obtain a tier result of 5 with their Sciences attribute).
     







      Prototype Crossbows
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Armsmith, Crossbow Crafter, & Beta Crossbows specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta crossbows and made them user-friendly. Now anybody 
can use a crossbow that you designate as being a prototype.
     







      p Firearm & Crossbow Augments M
     



      Accurate
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      Fine attention has been placed on the quality of your weapon. The user gains a bonus to accuracy with the weapon.
     



      +1
     



      +2
     



      +3
     



      +4
     







      Automatic Reload
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      The crossbow or firearm has a fast reloading mechanism, allowing it to be reloaded much more quickly than normal.
     



      1 less AP to reload
     



      1 less AP to reload
     



      2 less AP to reload
     



      2 less AP to reload
     







      Bipod
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      You
 can set up a bipod to level your weapon on. Setting up the bipod 
requires 2 action points, and then pulling it back up so that you can 
move again requires 1 action point. While the bipod is set up, however, 
you gain a bonus on your accuracy.
     



      +1
     



      +2
     



      +3
     



      +4
     







      Collapsible
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      Sometimes
 discretion is the better part of not having your weaponry confiscated, 
so you create a clever collapsing mechanism for your weapons which makes
 them easier to conceal. Any weapon this is applied to can be broken 
down for 3 action points and re-assembled for 3 action points. It is 
treated, for purposes of concealment, as being smaller than it is, but 
only when broken down.
     



      1 category smaller
     



      2 categories smaller
     



      3 categories smaller
     



      4 categories smaller
     







      Crank-Free
     



      Firearm Augment
     



      Requires: Augmented with Rotating Barrels
     



      Converting
 your firearm to be truly automatic, the crank-free firearm no longer 
increases the need of hands - a one-handed firearm is still one-handed, 
and a two-handed firearm is still just two-handed.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Custom
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      This
 weapon was designed to be used by one person and one person only. That 
person must be designated at the time of the weapon’s crafting. If 
anybody else attempts to use the custom weapon, they suffer a penalty on
 all accuracy and strike rolls with it.
     



      -3
     



      -6
     



      -9
     



      -12
     







      Damaging
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Firearm or Crossbow
     



      Your weapon is larger but lighter, dealing extra damage with each shot.
     



      +1 damage class
     



      +2 damage class
     



      +3 damage class
     



      +4 damage class
     







      Deflecting
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      You
 can use this weapon like a shield, allowing you to deflect incoming 
attacks (gaining a +4 to evade in exchange for 1 reflexive action 
point).
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Delivery
     



      Crossbow Augment
     



      You
 can launch an alchemic potion, explosives, or other items through your 
firearm. If the item shot is friendly (as in, you’re not trying to hit 
the target), you may shoot the item next to them, and they may pick it 
up for 1 action point. Regardless, a delivery weapon’s range is cut be a
 small portion whenever it is being used to deliver an item.
     



      -75 feet
     



      -50 feet
     



      -25 feet
     



      no penalty
     







      Easily Altered
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      Requires: Weapon to be made with Interchangeable Parts
     



      The
 weapon is easily altered, allowing its interchangeable parts to be used
 and switched around much more quickly than normal. The easily altered 
augment is a permanent affixture of the weapon, however, and cannot be 
activated or deactivated with interchangeable parts.
     



      2 AP to interchange parts
     



      2 AP to interchange parts
     



      1 AP to interchange parts
     



      1 AP to interchange parts
     







      Gnome-Sized
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      Requires: placed on light weapon
     



      You’ve been able to shrink the weapon down so that a gnome will be able to conceal it.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Horrifying
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Firearm or Crossbow
     



      The
 weapon is so twisted and wicked-looking that it could strike fear into 
the heart of even the bravest of warriors. When first seeing the weapon,
 all enemies must make a spirit resist or suffer from tier 1 fear. At 
any time a character can spend an action point to attempt another resist
 roll. A single person can only evoke the effect of one horrifying 
weapon per combat.
     



      Tier 2 Spirit result to resist
     



      Tier 3 Spirit result to resist
     



      Tier 4 Spirit result to resist
     



      Irresistable (unless they can get a Tier 5 Spirit resist)
     







      Location Seeking
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      When
 crafting this weapon designate a called shot. The weapon seems to guide
 itself toward that specific called on your victim’s body with the 
greatest of ease. Called shots to the designated location do not require
 an additional action point when made with this weapon. However, 
attacking any other called shot location with this weapon can be 
problematic, as it was built with one cause in mind. (This penalty does 
not apply to normal, unspecified attacks.)
     



      -8 on accuracy rolls when attacking a different called shot location
     



      -6 on accuracy rolls when attacking a different called shot location
     



      -4 on accuracy rolls when attacking a different called shot location
     



      -2 on accuracy rolls when attacking a different called shot location
     







      Note:
 When crafting the augment, the word “location” should be replaced with 
the specified called shot, such as “eye seeking” or “torso seeking.”
     







      Luminous
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      Your
 weapon glows. Perhaps you strung lights along its barrel, gave it a 
glow-in-the-dark coating, or made your weapon transparent with a light 
set inside. The light extends outwards from your weapon a number of feet
 determined by the marque of this augment. For 1 action point, you may 
turn it on, off, or dim it.
     



      25 feet
     



      50 feet
     



      100 feet
     



      200 feet
     







      Reinforced
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      You
 build your weapon solidly, giving it little room to break on the 
battlefield. When somebody attempts to sunder the reinforced weapon, it 
acts as if it is several size categories larger than it is. Once these 
“reinforced” size categories are gone, then its actual damage begins to 
decrease.
     



      This augment can be applied multiple times, its effect stacking.
     



      1 reinforced size category
     



      2 reinforced size categories
     



      3 reinforced size categories
     



      4 reinforced size categories
     







      Rotating Barrels
     



      Firearm Augment
     



      Creating
 what comes close to being a fully automatic weapon, a firearm with 
multiple rotating barrels uses a crank to fire. Using rotating barrels 
increases the need of hands - a one-handed firearm now requires two 
hands, and a two-handed firearm now requires you to be in a “firing 
position.” A rotating multi-barrel firearm eliminates the reload time of
 the firearm, but at a price to accuracy.
     



      This
 augment can only be placed on firearms that use ammunition and have a 
reload time of 2 action points or less.
     



      -5 accuracy
     



      -3 accuracy
     



      -1 accuracy
     



      No accuracy penalty
     







      Scope
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      The range on your firearm increases greatly. This augment can be applied multiple times, with its increases stacking.
     



      +50 feet
     



      +100 feet
     



      +200 feet
     



      +300 feet
     







      Signature Weapon
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Firearm or Crossbow
     



      Requires: placed on weapon with Custom augment
     



      Be
 it a family heirloom or just your perfectly customized weapon, the very
 sight of it invigorates you. As long as your weapon is in hand there is
 still hope. You recover a small amount of hit points when your action 
points refresh. This augment only affects the person this weapon was 
customized for.
     



      recover 1 hit point
     



      recover 2 hit points
     



      recover 3 hit points
     



      recover 4 hit points
     







      Silent
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      This
 weapon is whispering death. It makes almost no sound when shot or 
reloaded, making it almost impossible for people to figure out where it 
is by sound alone. Any time anybody is attempting to figure out where 
the weapon was shot from based on sound must make a tier result with 
their cunning.
     



      Tier 2
     



      Tier 3
     



      Tier 4
     



      Impossible (or Tier 5)
     







      Small Choke
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Augment
     



      Introducing
 a small choke to a shotgun increases the effective distance of its 
shot. A small choke doubles the range of the shot fired from it. Other 
choices of ammunition fired from a small choke suffer a -3 accuracy.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     











      p Firearm & Crossbow Accessories M
     



      You
 can learn weapon accessories just like augments. However, firearm &
 crossbow accessories do not take up any augment slots and can only be 
applied to a weapon once. Each accessory has its own cost associated 
with it.
     







      Chained-Grip
     



      Firearm & Crossbow Accessory
     



      The
 user keeps a chain attached to both their wrist and the weapon, making 
it difficult - if not impossible - to be disarmed. Whenever the target 
of a disarm (called shot to the hand), the user gains a bonus to the 
resist roll.
     



      +2 to resist being disarmed
     



      +4 to resist being disarmed
     



      +6 to resist being disarmed
     



      +8 to resist being disarmed
     







      Crafting Melee Weapons & Throwing Weapons
     



      Weapon Smith
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      You
 can create new melee weapons and throwing weapons and upgrade them. 
These weapons can be of any size, type, or material. You can craft 
anything from a metal stiletto to a wooden pike to a sword made from 
bone.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several weapons based on
 your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These weapons can then be 
upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, 
which can be selected under “weapon augments” below. These augments have
 marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. As your 
skill in Armsmith improves, your marques will increase. See the 
“Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 weapon can be upgraded with 3 augments. Some materials can only be 
upgraded twice (like wooden weapons) or just once (like organic ones). 
Sometimes an augment will take up multiple augment slots. For example, 
the “damaging” augment is worth 2 slots, so a weapon only has 1 more 
available slot for an augment after “damaging” has been applied.
     







      Number of Weapons you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some weapons entirely out
 of scraps. These weapons must be constantly maintained by you and stop 
working soon after leaving your care. You may build and maintain a 
number of weapons based on your DIY score. You may build new weapons or 
augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Weapons z
     



      If you need to build a weapon that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      A weapon will have a base materials cost. It is 1/5th the market price.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price fo a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 5 princes.
     







      Beta Weapons
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Armsmith & Weaponsmith specialty
     



      Your
 weapons are overly complex, but they can accomplish quite a bit. Such 
weapons can be upgraded with 2 more augments (bringing the total for 
metal melee weapons up to 5 augmentable slots).
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta weapons, they 
must succeed in rolling a Sciences result one tier higher than the 
highest marque you have on your weapon. If your weapon has a Marque IV 
augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can somehow 
obtain a tier result of 5 with their Sciences attribute).
     







      Prototype Weapons
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Armsmith, Weapon Smith, & Beta Weapons specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta weapons and made them user-friendly. Now anybody 
can use a weapon that you designate as being a prototype.
     







      Interchangeable Parts
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: Weapon Smith specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      Your
 weapons are designed so that their parts can be replaced and altered in
 the middle of battle. This gives the weapons additional slots for 
augments, but these augments are not always active. At any time, a 
person may switch out the augments for 3 action points, activating one 
augment but deactivating another augment. You may replace multiple 
augments at the same time all for the cost of 3 action points.
     



      This
 specialty works within the marque system. The amount of interchangeable
 slots the weapon has depends on the marque of its creator.
     



      1 interchangeable slot for an augment
     



      2 interchangeable slots for augments
     



      3 interchangeable slots for augments
     



      4 interchangeable slots for augments
     







      p Weapon Augments M
     



      Accurate
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Fine attention has been placed on the quality of your weapon. The user gains a bonus to accuracy with the weapon.
     



      +1
     



      +2
     



      +3
     



      +4
     







      Aerodynamic
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      You
 can make your melee weapons into perfectly good throwing weapons. If 
you apply this augment onto one of your melee weapons, you may throw it 
like a weapon designed for throwing.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Bone-Shattering
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      By increasing the weapon’s density, the weapon allows its wielder to make more effective called shots against his victims.
     



      +1 strike against all called shot locations
     



      +3 strike against all called shot locations
     



      +5 strike against all called shot locations
     



      +7 strike against all called shot locations
     







      Chainsaw
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: placed on a melee weapon
     



      Cost: 1 AP (after a successful attack)
     



      Your
 weapon has a deadly, barbed spinning edge. If you make a successful 
attack with a chainsaw weapon that deals damage, you may spend 1 action 
point (as many times as you have AP left in your turn) to deal 
additional unsoakable damage as the chainsaw continues to rip into the 
person.
     



      1 extra damage
     



      2 extra damage
     



      3 extra damage
     



      4 extra damage
     







      Collapsible
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Sometimes
 discretion is the better part of not having your weaponry confiscated, 
so you create a clever collapsing mechanism for your weapons which makes
 them easier to conceal. Any weapon this is applied to can be broken 
down for 3 acion points and re-assembled for 3 action points. It is 
treated, for purposes of concealment, as being smaller than it is, but 
only when broken down.
     



      1 category smaller
     



      2 categories smaller
     



      3 categories smaller
     



      4 categories smaller
     







      Cryothermal
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Resist: Brute (marques down)
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively during an attack
     



      Your
 weapon leaks a subzero liquid that freezes the opponent upon contact. 
When you make an attack with a cryothermal weapon, you may spend 1 
action point to make the target frosty. Unless your victim can resist 
the entire effect, they become chilled, making them shiver when they 
attack.
     



      Victim suffers a -2 on strike rolls until your next turn
     



      Victim suffers a -4 on strike rolls until your next turn
     



      Victim suffers a -6 on strike rolls until your next turn
     



      Victim suffers a -8 on strike rolls until your next turn
     







      Custom
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      This
 weapon was designed to be used by one person and one person only. That 
person must be designated at the time of the weapon’s crafting. If 
anybody else attempts to use the custom weapon, they suffer a penalty on
 all accuracy and strike rolls with it.
     



      -3
     



      -6
     



      -9
     



      -12
     







      Damaging
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Weapon
     



      Your weapon is larger but lighter, dealing extra damage with each blow.
     



      +1 damage class
     



      +2 damage class
     



      +3 damage class
     



      +4 damage class
     







      Deflecting
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      You
 may use this weapon like a shield, allowing you to deflect incoming 
attacks (gaining a +4 to evade in exchange for 1 reflexive action 
point).
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     



      Easily Altered
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: weapon to be made with Interchangeable Parts
     



      The
 weapon is easily altered, allowing its interchangeable parts to be used
 and switched around much more quickly than normal. The easily altered 
augment is a permanent affixture of the weapon, however, and cannot be 
activated or deactivated with interchangeable parts.
     



      2 AP to interchange parts
     



      2 AP to interchange parts
     



      1 AP to interchange parts
     



      1 AP to interchange parts
     







      Electrical
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      A
 small metal coil runs down the length of your weapon, leading to a 
power source that electrifies it. After landing a hit, your victim is 
shocked for a small amount of unsoakable damage. If the opponent is in 
metal armor or submersed in water, they take twice the damage. (If they 
are both in water and metal armor, they take four times the damage.)
     



      1 unsoakable electrical damage
     



      2 unsoakable electrical damage
     



      3 unsoakable electrical damage
     



      4 unsoakable electrical damage
     







      Electrical Archs
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: placed on weapon with the Electrical augment
     



      The
 electricity that runs down your blade now jumps about, hitting multiple
 victims. Once you’ve hit an opponent, the electricity will arch to 
another opponent within 10 feet. Roll your accuracy versus their evade. 
If you meet or exceed it, the second opponent will be hit by the arch 
(dealing the normal damage for your electricity). The electricity will 
arch a number of times based on the marque of the augment. If, at any 
point, you miss a target, the electricity will not continue to jump.
     



      Electricity jumps once
     



      Electricity jumps twice
     



      Electricity jumps thrice
     



      Electricity jumps quatrice
     







      Gas Leaks
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Cost to Activate: 1 AP reflexively during an attack
     



      Your
 weapon is hollow and covered in pores. You can fill your weapon with 
deadly gases that you release when you hit your opponent. You may choose
 to release multiple gases at the same time, but each one costs 1 action
 point. The augment’s marque determines how many gases it can hold. It 
costs 3 action points to add refill a single canister of gas.
     



      Holds up to 1 dose
     



      Holds up to 2 doses
     



      Holds up to 3 doses
     



      Holds up to 4 doses
     







      Note:
 Unless you have doses of alchemical gas loaded into the weapon, this 
augment grants no bonuses. See Alchemy for the crafting of gases.
     







      Gnome-Sized
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: placed on light weapon
     



      You’ve been able to shrink the weapon down so that a gnome will be able to conceal it.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Horrifying
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Weapon
     



      The
 weapon is so twisted and wicked-looking that it could strike fear into 
the heart of even the bravest of warriors. When first seeing the weapon,
 all enemies must make a spirit resist or suffer from tier 1 fear. At 
any time, a character may spend an action point to attempt another 
resist roll. A single person can only evoke the effect of one horrifying
 weapon per combat.
     



      Tier 2 Spirit result to resist
     



      Tier 3 Spirit result to resist
     



      Tier 4 Spirit result to resist
     



      Irresistable (unless they can get a Tier 5 spirit resist)
     







      Inspiring
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Weapon
     



      This
 weapon is symbolic to your allies, inspiring them to fight onwards when
 it’s in your hand. All allies that can see your weapon recover a small 
amount of hit points when you’re wielding it and your action points 
refresh. This does not stack with other inspiring weapons.
     



      allies recover 1 hit point
     



      allies recover 2 hit points
     



      allies recover 2 hit points
     



      allies recover 3 hit points
     







      Jackhammer
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Weapon
     



      A
 small, unbalanced sphere spins in the hilt of the weapon, causing it to
 vibrate wildly. This allows the weapon to deal tremendous damage to 
machines, vehicles with moving parts, and stationary structures.
     



      +2 damage class against automatons, vehicles, clockworks, and structures
     



      +4 damage class against automatons, vehicles, clockworks, and structures
     



      +6 damage class against automatons, vehicles, clockworks, and structures
     



      +8 damage class against automatons, vehicles, clockworks, and structures
     







      Lightning Pulsing
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Weapon
     



      Cost to Activate and Deactivate: 1 AP
     



      Your
 weapon pulses with lightning, just looking for a target to vaporize. 
Lightning is a powerful force that is hard to control. It causes the 
user to take a penalty on their accuracy roll, but the attack is 
unsoakable if the opponent is wet or in metal armor. The lightning pulse
 can be turned on or turned off for 1 action point. While it is on, the 
penalty is always in effect.
     



      -8 on the accuracy roll
     



      -6 on the accuracy roll
     



      -4 on the accuracy roll
     



      -2 on the accuracy roll
     







      Location Seeking
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      When
 crafting this weapon designate a called shot. The weapon seems to guide
 itself toward that specific called shot on your victim’s body with the 
greatest of ease. Called shots to the designated location do not require
 an additional action point when made with this weapon. However, 
attacking any other called shot location with this weapon can be 
problematic, as it was built with one cause in mind. (This penalty does 
not apply to normal, unspecified attacks.)
     



      -8 on accuracy rolls when attacking a different called shot location
     



      -6 on accuracy rolls when attacking a different called shot location
     



      -4 on accuracy rolls when attacking a different called shot location
     



      -2 on accuracy rolls when attacking a different called shot location
     







      Note:
 When crafting the augment, the word “location” should be replaced with 
the specified called shot, such as “eye seeking” or “torso seeking.”
     



      Long Archs
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: placed on a weapon with Electrical Archs augment
     



      Generally,
 electrical archs will jump from one target to another at a very small 
distance. The electricity will simply fizzle out if it goes too far. But
 with longer archs, your weapon’s electricity will take great leaps 
across the battlefield.
     



      Can arch up to 25 feet
     



      Can arch up to 50 feet
     



      Can arch up to 75 feet
     



      Can arch up to 100 feet
     







      Luminous
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Your
 weapon glows. Perhaps you strung lights along its blade, gave it a 
glow-in-the-dark coating, or made your weapon transparent with a light 
set inside. The light extends outwards from your weapon a number of feet
 determined by the marque of this augment. For 1 action point, you may 
turn it on, off, or dim it.
     



      25 feet
     



      50 feet
     



      100 feet
     



      200 feet
     















      Powerful
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Your
 weapon is stronger than others, be it due to a sharper blade, large 
striking side, or a heftier head. Regardless, it gives the user a bonus 
on their strike rolls.
     



      +2 on strike
     



      +4 on strike
     



      +6 on strike
     



      +8 on strike
     







      Propelled
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: placed on throwing weapons
     



      The
 weapon sails through the air, being easy to throw and going much 
further than its mundane counterparts. An easily thrown weapon has a 
farther range.
     



      +20 feet
     



      +30 feet
     



      +40 feet
     



      +60 feet
     







      Reach
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      You extend the weapon so that it can reach farther.
     



      5 feet farther
     



      5 feet farther
     



      10 feet farther
     



      10 feet farther
     







      Reinforced
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      You
 build your weapon solidly, giving it little room to break on the 
battlefield. When somebody attempts to sunder the reinforced weapon, it 
acts as if it is several size categories larger than it is. Once these 
“reinforced” size categories are gone, then its actual damage begins to 
decrease.
     



      1 reinforced size category
     



      2 reinforced size categories
     



      3 reinforced size categories
     



      4 reinforced size categories
     







      Returning
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: placed on throwing weapon
     



      You
 can throw your weapon, and it will return to you. Due to this, the 
range you can throw it is decreased, but you will always have the weapon
 on hand.
     



      -30 feet
     



      -20 feet
     



      -10 feet
     



      no ranged penalty
     







      Signature Weapon
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Weapon
     



      Requires: placed on weapon with Custom augment
     



      Be
 it a family heirloom or just your perfectly customized weapon, the very
 sight of it invigorates you. As long as your weapon is in hand there is
 still hope. You recover a small amount of hit points when your action 
points refresh. This augment only affects the person this blade was 
customized for.
     



      recover 1 hit point
     



      recover 2 hit points
     



      recover 3 hit points
     



      recover 4 hit points
     







      Skullsmasher
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      This
 weapon has a specially weighted spike designed to cause severe brain 
trauma when striking against an opponent’s head or eyes.
     



      +2 strike when making a called shot to the head or eyes
     



      +4 strike when making a called shot to the head or eyes
     



      +6 strike when making a called shot to the head or eyes
     



      +8 strike when making a called shot to the head or eyes
     







      Specialized
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: placed on weapon with Custom augment
     



      Be
 it from pressurized spikes in its grip or an unearthly balance, when a 
person attempts to wield the weapon, it causes them harm. The person the
 weapon was customized for is immune to this effect.
     



      The weapon causes its user 2 unsoakable damage with each use
     



      The weapon causes its user 4 unsoakable damage with each use
     



      The weapon causes its user 6 unsoakable damage with each use
     



      The weapon causes its user 8 unsoakable damage with each use
     







      Static
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Resist: Brute (marques down)
     



      Cost to Activate: 1 AP reflexively
     



      You
 can make sparks fly off your weapon as you bring it in to decimate your
 foe. For 1 action point, you can make your attack full of static, 
causing the target to lose their ability to react as quickly. Meanwhile,
 their hair also stands on end.
     



      Victim suffers a -1 on evade rolls until your next turn
     



      Victim suffers a -2 on evade rolls until your next turn
     



      Victim suffers a -3 on evade rolls until your next turn
     



      Victim suffers a -4 on evade rolls until your next turn
     







      Streamlined
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Takes up 3 Augment Slots on a Weapon
     



      Requires: placed on light or medium weapon
     



      Made
 of only the lightest and highest quality parts, this weapon has feels 
lighter than air. All attacks made with this weapon cost 1 action point.
     



      -3 damage class
     



      -2 damage class
     



      -1 damage class
     



      no damage class penalty
     







      Tangling
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: placed on flexible weapon
     



      The
 whip is specially designed to make grabs against the opponent. Whenever
 used, the whip gains a bonus on all rolls to prevent the target from 
resisting the grab.
     



      +2
     



      +4
     



      +6
     



      +8
     







      Pyrothermal
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Resist: Brute (marques down)
     



      Cost to Activate: 1 AP reflexively during an attack
     



      Your
 weapon heats up, burning the target. When you attack, you may spend 1 
action point to make it pyrothermal. If it hits, the attack burns its 
target should they fail to resist against your melee attack. These burns
 last until the victim’s next breather, when they can be treated.
     



      Victim suffers Tier 1 burns (-1 on defense rolls)
     



      Victim suffers Tier 2 burns (-3 on defense rolls)
     



      Victim suffers Tier 3 burns (-5 on defense rolls)
     



      Victim suffers Tier 4 burns (-7 on defense rolls)
     







      Combustion
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Takes up 3 Augment Slots on a Weapon
     



      Resist: Dexterity (marques down)
     



      Cost to Activate: 1 AP reflexively during an attack
     



      Fire
 lashes out around your weapon, catching those struck with it on fire. 
When you hit an opponent, you can spend 1 action point in order to 
attempt to catch them on fire. The target may resist with their 
Dexterity (lowering the marques of the combustion).
     



      The victim catches on Tier 1 fire
     



      The victim catches on Tier 2 fire
     



      The victim catches on Tier 2 fire
     



      The victim catches on Tier 3 fire
     







      Burn Trail
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: placed on weapon with the Combustion augment
     



      Any
 person attempting to physically aid a victim of your Combustion must 
first make a Dexterity resist that equals the marque of your Combustion 
augment or be set on fire themselves.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Everburning
     



      Weapon Augment
     



      Requires: placed on weapon with the Combustion augment
     



      Despite
 your victim’s best efforts to put themselves out, they seem to continue
 burning. When catching things on fire through the use of a combustion 
attack, extra action points are required to put out the fire.
     



      1 extra AP
     



      2 extra AP
     



      3 extra AP
     



      4 extra AP
     







      p Weapon Accessories M
     



      You
 can learn weapon accessories just like augments. However, weapon 
accessories do not take up any augment slots and can only be applied to a
 weapon once. Each weapon accessory has its own cost associated with it.
     



      Alchemic Tube
     



      Weapon Accessory
     



      The
 weapon has a container attached to it and a rivet or channel that 
allows the weapon to strike with poison or another alchemical substance.
 The container can hold one usage of the substance. After its use, it 
takes some action points to snap a new alchemical substance into.
     



      3 AP
     



      2 AP
     



      1 AP
     



      1 AP reflexively
     







      Chained-Grip
     



      Weapon Accessory
     



      The
 user keeps a chain attached to both their wrist and the weapon, making 
it difficult - if not impossible - to be disarmed. Whenever the target 
of a disarm (called shot to the hand), the user gains a bonus to the 
resist roll.
     



      +2 to resist being disarmed
     



      +4 to resist being disarmed
     



      +6 to resist being disarmed
     



      +8 to resist being disarmed
     











      Crafting Bows
     



      Bowyer
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      You can now create new bows of any size and upgrade them.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several bows based on 
your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These bows can then be upgraded
 with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, which can 
be selected under “bow augments” below. These augments have marques. At 
lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. As your skill in 
Armsmith improves, your marques will increase. See the “Crafting” page 
at the beginning of this chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 bow can be upgraded with 3 augments. Some materials can only be 
upgraded twice (like wooden bows) or just once (like organic ones). 
Sometimes an augment will take up multiple augment slots. For example, 
the “damaging” augment is worth 2 slots, so a metal bow only has 1 more 
available slot for an augment after “damaging” has been applied.
     







      Number of Bows you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can carve some bows entirely out of
 scraps. These bows must be constantly maintained by you and stop 
working soon after leaving your care. You may build and maintain a 
number of bows based on your DIY score. You may build new bows or 
augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Bows z
     



      If you need to build a bow that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      A bow will have a base materials cost. It is 1/5th the market price.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price for a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 5 princes.
     







      Beta Bows
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Armsmith & Bowyer specialty
     



      Your
 bows are surprisingly complex, but they can do a lot more than standard
 bows. Such bows can be upgraded with 2 more augments (bringing the 
total for metal bow up to 5 augmentable slots).
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta bows, they must
 succeed in rolling a sciences result one tier higher than the highest 
marque you have on your bow. If your bow has a Marque IV augment, it is 
impossible for them to use it (unless they can somehow obtain a tier 
result of 5 with their Sciences attribute).
     







      Prototype Bows
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Armsmith, Bowyer, & Beta Bows specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta bows and made them user-friendly. Now anybody can 
use a bow that you designate as being a prototype.
     







      p Bow Augments M
     



      Accurate
     



      Bow Augment
     



      Fine attention has been placed on the quality of your bow. The user gains a bonus to accuracy with the bow.
     



      +1
     



      +2
     



      +3
     



      +4
     







      Collapsible
     



      Bow Augment
     



      Sometimes
 discretion is the better part of not having your weaponry confiscated, 
so you create a clever collapsing mechanism for your bows which makes 
them easier to conceal. Any bow this is applied to can be broken down 
for 3 action points and re-assembled for 3 action points. It is treated,
 for purposes of concealment, as being smaller than it is, but only when
 broken down.
     



      1 category smaller
     



      2 categories smaller
     



      3 categories smaller
     



      4 categories smaller
     







      Custom
     



      Bow Augment
     



      This
 bow was designed to be used by one person and one person only. That 
person must be designated at the time of the bow’s crafting. If anybody 
else attempts to use the custom bow, they suffer a penalty on all 
accuracy and strike rolls with it.
     



      -3
     



      -6
     



      -9
     



      -12
     







      Damaging
     



      Bow Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Bow
     



      Your bow is larger but lighter, dealing extra damage with each blow.
     



      +1 damage class
     



      +2 damage class
     



      +3 damage class
     



      +4 damage class
     







      Ground-Mount
     



      Bow Augment
     



      You
 can set up your bow on the ground, using the earth to steady your shot.
 Setting up the bow requires 2 action points, and then pulling it back 
up so that you can move again requires 1 action point. While the bow is 
set in place, however, you gain a bonus on your accuracy.
     



      +1
     



      +2
     



      +3
     



      +4
     







      Deflecting
     



      Bow Augment
     



      You
 can use this bow like a shield, allowing you to deflect incoming 
attacks (gaining a +4 to evade in exchange for 1 reflexive action 
point).
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Easily Altered
     



      Bow Augment
     



      Requires: Weapon to be made with Interchangeable Parts
     



      The
 weapon is easily altered, allowing its interchangeable parts to be used
 and switched around much more quickly than normal. The easily altered 
augment is a permanent affixture of the weapon, however, and cannot be 
activated or deactivated with interchangeable parts.
     



      2 AP to interchange parts
     



      2 AP to interchange parts
     



      1 AP to interchange parts
     



      1 AP to interchange parts
     







      Powerful
     



      Bow Augment
     



      Your weapon has a greater pull than others, giving the user a bonus on their strike rolls.
     



      +2 on strike
     



      +4 on strike
     



      +6 on strike
     



      +8 on strike
     







      Quickened Arrows
     



      Bow Augment
     



      Your
 bow fires arrows faster and more forcefully than most, making them have
 a more powerful knockback effect. Whenever your bow is used to make a 
called shot against a target’s torso, it gets a bonus to strike just for
 the called shot effect. The bonus does not affect the damage tier of 
the attack
     



      +2 to Strike for Torso called shots
     



      +4 to Strike for Torso called shots
     



      +6 to Strike for Torso called shots
     



      +10 to Strike for Torso called shots
     







      Reinforced
     



      Bow Augment
     



      You
 build your bow solidly, giving it little room to break on the 
battlefield. Whenever somebody attempts to sunder the reinforced bow, it
 acts as if it is several size categories larger than it is. Once these 
“reinforced” size categories are gone, then its actual damage begins to 
decrease.
     



      1 reinforced size category
     



      2 reinforced size categories
     



      3 reinforced size categories
     



      4 reinforced size categories
     







      Scope
     



      Bow Augment
     



      The range on your bow increases greatly, improving the range that the bow can accurate hit a target within.
     



      +50 feet
     



      +100 feet
     



      +200 feet
     



      +300 feet
     







      Silent
     



      Bow Augment
     



      This
 bow is whispering death. It makes almost no sound when an arrow is 
nocked or fired from it, making it almost impossible for people to 
figure out where it is by sound alone. Any time anybody is attempting to
 figure out where the bow was shot from based on sound must make a tier 
result with their cunning.
     



      Tier 2
     



      Tier 3
     



      Tier 4
     



      Impossible (or Tier 5)
     







      Versatile
     



      Bow Augment
     



      Your
 bow is also an effective melee weapon. You can make attacks against 
adjacent opponents for 2 action points, although your damage class is at
 a -1 when doing so.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Combustion
     



      Bow Augment
     



      Takes up 3 Augment Slots on a Bow
     



      Resist: Dexterity (marques down)
     



      Cost to Activate: Attack +1 AP
     



      Fire
 lashes out from your bow, allowing you to set your arrows on fire. You 
can use this to attempt to set your enemy aflame. The target may resist 
with their dexterity (lowering the marques of the combustion).
     



      The victim catches on Tier 1 fire
     



      The victim catches on Tier 2 fire
     



      The victim catches on Tier 2 fire
     



      The victim catches on Tier 3 fire
     







      Burn Trail
     



      Bow Augment
     



      Requires: placed on bow with the Combustion augment
     



      Any
 person attempting to physically aid a victim of your Combustion must 
first make a dexterity resist that equals the marque of your Combustion 
augment or be set on fire themselves.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Everburning
     



      Bow Augment
     



      Requires: placed on bow with the Combustion augment
     



      Despite
 your victim’s best efforts to put themselves out, they seem to continue
 burning. When catching things on fire through the use of a Combustion 
attack, extra action points are required to put out the fire.
     



      1 extra AP
     



      2 extra AP
     



      3 extra AP
     



      4 extra AP
     







      Crafting Armor
     



      Armor Smith
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      You can now create armor and upgrade it. You can upgrade any type of armor.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several suits of armor 
based on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These armors can then 
be upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, 
which can be selected under “armor augments” below. These augments have 
marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. As your 
skill in Armsmith improves, your marques will increase. See the 
“Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 armor can be upgraded with 3 augments. Some materials can only be 
upgraded twice (like wooden armors) or just once (like organic armors). 
Sometimes an augment will take up multiple augment slots. For example, 
the “damage soaking” augment is worth 2 slots, so a metal suit of armor 
only has 1 more available slot for an augment after “damage soaking” has
 been applied.
     







      Number of Armors you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some armor entirely out 
of scraps. These armors must be constantly maintained by you and stop 
working soon after leaving your care. You may build and maintain a 
number of armors based on your DIY score. You may build new armors or 
augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Armors z
     



      If
 you need to build a suit of armor that you can’t build for free from 
your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      Armor will have a base materials cost. It is 1/5th the market price.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price fo a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 4 princes.
     







      Beta Armor
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Armsmith & Armor Smith specialty
     



      Your
 armor comes with a lot of weird straps and oddly placed component, but 
their efficiency is unbreakable. Such armors have two more slots for you
 to place augments into.
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta armors, they 
must succeed in rolling a Sciences result one tier higher than the 
highest level marque you have on your armor. If your armor has a Marque 
IV augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can somehow
 obtain a tier result of 5 with their science attribute).
     







      Prototype Armor
     



      Armsmith Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Armsmith, Armor Smith, & Beta Armor specialty
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta armor and made them user-friendly. Now, any of your
 beta armors that you designate as being prototypes, anybody can use.
     











      p Armor & Shield Augments M
     



      Airmelting
     



      Armor Augment
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP
     



      The
 armor has numerous exhausts, heat valves, and pipes on it that, when 
released, super-heat the air around the wearer. If you’re wearing this 
armor and spend 1 action point to release the exhausts, it heats the air
 around you. Everyone within 5 feet of you takes heat damage, and you 
take half that amount (unless you have fireproofing).
     



      2 damage
     



      4 damage
     



      6 damage
     



      8 damage
     







      Bracings
     



      Armor Augment
     



      The
 armor is braced to prevent you from ever falling prone. Unless you 
choose to undo the bracings (an action that costs 1 action point), there
 is no way the wearer of this armor can go prone.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Bulletproofing
     



      Armor Augment
     



      The armor is designed to take bullets. Whenever being shot by a firearm, the wearer gains a bonus on their defense roll.
     



      +2 defense
     



      +4 defense
     



      +6 defense
     



      +8 defense
     







      Camouflage
     



      Armor Augment
     



      The
 armor has been painted, ruffled, and tarnishes added to allow it to 
blend in more efficiently in natural terrains. When in the uncivilized 
outdoors, this armor grants a bonus to cunning rolls when attempting to 
hide.
     



      +2
     



      +4
     



      +6
     



      +8
     







      Crashbreaking
     



      Armor Augment
     



      This
 armor is designed to help cushion the wearer’s fall by absorbing the 
shock and keeping the person inside from rattling around. It’s not going
 to keep you alive in a crashing airship from a high altitude, but it 
might help out when somebody pushes you over the side of the building. 
While wearing crashbreaking armor, you can fall farther before taking 
wounds damage.
     



      1 wounds damage per 30 feet fallen
     



      1 wounds damage per 40 feet fallen
     



      1 wounds damage per 50 feet fallen
     



      1 wounds damage per 60 feet fallen
     







      Damage Soaking
     



      Armor Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on Armor
     



      Your armor is so thick that it soaks more damage than normal.
     



      +1 damage soak class
     



      +2 damage soak class
     



      +3 damage soak class
     



      +4 damage soak class
     







      Defensive
     



      Armor Augment
     



      This
 armor is heavier, with more shock-absorbent plating and fewer spots for
 enemy blade’s to find cleavage. This armor provides a bonus to the 
wearer’s defense.
     



      +2 defense
     



      +4 defense
     



      +6 defense
     



      +8 defense
     







      Electro-Absorption
     



      Armor Augment
     



      The
 armor re-routes electricity through it and into specially created 
devices that absorb the shock. Anything that deals electricity damage is
 not entirely soakable, and attacks that deal electricity damage (even 
if they are only partially electrical, such as attacks with a pulsing 
weapon) increase the soak class of the armor.
     



      +2 soak class against electrical attacks
     



      +4 soak class against electrical attacks
     



      +6 soak class against electrical attacks
     



      +8 soak class against electrical attacks
     







      Fireproofing
     



      Armor Augment
     



      While
 wearing armor that has fireproofing, all fire attacks are soakable. 
Furthermore, the soak class for the armor is improved against fire. (If 
the wearer would take burns or be set on fire from a fire attack that is
 entirely soaked, the extra effects are negated.)
     



      +1 soak class against fire
     



      +2 soak class against fire
     



      +3 soak class against fire
     



      +4 soak class against fire
     







      Flame Retardant
     



      Armor Augment
     



      The armor generally cannot be caught on fire, depending on how intense the fire is.
     



      Cannot be caught on tier 1 fire
     



      Cannot be caught on tier 2 fire
     



      Cannot be caught on tier 3 fire
     



      Cannot be caught on tier 4 fire
     







      Handcrushing
     



      Armor Augment
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP
     



      When
 people add gears to their armor, it’s not merely steampunk-themed 
decor. Those gears are designed to tear apart anybody who lays a hand on
 that armor. If a person is grabbing you while wearing this armor, you 
may spend 1 action point to activate the spinning gears, the hydraulic 
spikes, or the built-in flamethrower and deal unsoakable damage to the 
person touching you.
     



      4 damage
     



      8 damage
     



      12 damage
     



      16 damage
     







      Note:
 As a courtesy, feel free to remind the person grabbing you that they 
can reflexively let go of you for 0 action points whenever they’d like.
     







      Injector
     



      Armor Augment
     



      Through
 the use of a magnetic trigger system connected to a liquid injector, 
this augment creates a quick injection system that allows the wearer to,
 through the push of a button, inject himself with a dose of a chemical.
 It requires 5 action points to reload a dose of the chemical after it’s
 been used, but no action points to inject it. At any given time, the 
armor can only hold so many chemicals.
     



      1 alchemical potion
     



      2 alchemical potions
     



      3 alchemical potions
     



      4 alchemical potions
     







      Mobile
     



      Armor Augment
     



      Light, easy to move in, and with enhanced piston-joints to really get you moving, this armor provides a bonus to your speed.
     



      +5 feet
     



      +10 feet
     



      +10 feet
     



      +15 feet
     







      Quick Equip
     



      Armor Augment
     



      Most armor takes a while to equip - not this stuff! It takes only a turn or two.
     



      10 AP to equip
     



      6 AP to equip
     



      3 AP to equip
     



      1 AP to equip
     







      Razor-Ridged
     



      Armor Augment
     



      Your
 armor has sharp edges, pointy bits, and moving pieces that keep enemies
 from grabbing you. Any time an opponent grabs onto you, they 
automatically take a number of unsoakable damage based on the 
razor-ridged marque. Every turn that they keep holding on to you, they 
take that damage again (this damage is dealt at the end of their turn, 
when their action points refresh).
     



      3 damage
     



      6 damage
     



      9 damage
     



      12 damage
     







      Reinforced Plating
     



      Armor Augment
     



      Through
 additional plating being added to various body parts, you are able to 
decrease the chances of called shots affecting you. When you choose this
 augment, choose one limb or area on the body (either arm, either leg, 
the torso, or the head). Thereafter, you gain a bonus whenever 
attempting to resist a called shot there.
     



      +2
     



      +4
     



      +6
     



      +8
     







      Stabilizing Rods
     



      Armor Augment
     



      Activation Cost: 0 AP (see below)
     



      Your
 armor is built with stabilizing rods in the arms that allow you to 
automatically enter firing stance for 0 action points. This allows you 
to fire super-heavy firearms and crossbows immediately. However, you are
 rooted to the spot you’re in until you spend 1 action point to reset 
the stabilizing rods back into their original location.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Armsmith.
     







      Slippery
     



      Armor Augment
     



      While
 wearing this armor, you are very difficult to grab on to. Any time you 
are attempting to evade a grab or resist a grab, you gain a bonus on 
your roll.
     



      +2
     



      +4
     



      +6
     



      +8
     







      Steaming
     



      Armor Augment
     



      Your
 armor lets off steam, enveloping you and everyone around you in a 
foggy, hard-to-see-through steam. You may turn it off for 1 action 
point, but otherwise it makes an area around you difficult to see 
through. Anybody in the area is affected by poor vision, and takes a -2 
to accuracy and evade rolls.
     



      5 feet
     



      10 feet
     



      15 feet
     



      20 feet
     







      Welded Weapon
     



      Armor Augment
     



      You
 weld a weapon to your armor. The weapon cannot be disarmed, dropped, or
 concealed, but it also does not need to be drawn in order to be used. 
The maximum size of the weapon depends on the mark.
     



      Medium
     



      Medium
     



      Heavy
     



      Heavy
     
















      Automata Skill
     



      Automata
 is the complex skill of piecing together machines that act on their own
 or do things that people cannot do by themselves. If you’re interested 
in creating a massive, mechanical juggernaut, an intelligent and 
self-serving automaton, or creating prosthetics that can be attached to 
your friends in place of their fleshy limbs, automata is your place.
     







      The 3 Types of Automatons
     



      There are three types of automatons that an automaton crafter can choose to develop.
     



      Steamers:
 Steam-powered automatons that are remotely controlled by their owner. 
Steamers are typically the largest and strongest of the three 
automatons.
     



      Fuse
 Boxes: Electric-powered automatons with brainworks that allow them to 
think on their own. Fuse boxes are rarely very strong, but they move 
entirely on their own accord.
     



      Clockworks:
 Automatons comprised of clockwork and springs that have pre-programmed 
analytical engines, causing them to only react to their surroundings.
     







      Once
 you’ve chosen which type of automaton you want to craft, you’ll take 
the specialty for that automaton. You may learn different types of 
automatons, and even apply different control styles to the same 
automaton.
     







      Skill Organization
     



      This
 skill begins with specialties allowing you to build and customize 
automatons up front, followed by specialties for building prosthetic 
body parts, which can be added to those automatons (or used as 
replacement limbs for other people). You’ll find Steamers first (and 
their boiler augments), then Fuse Boxes (along with their brainwork 
augments), and finally Clockworks (accompanied by their analytical 
engine augments).
     







      Automaton Repairs
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      You’re
 able to quickly repair an automaton in battle. To do so, you must be 
adjacent to it. By making the repairs, you restore a number of wounds to
 the automaton.
     



      10 wounds
     



      15 wounds
     



      20 wounds
     



      30 wounds
     







      Interchangeable Parts
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      Your
 automatons are designed so that their parts can be replaced and altered
 in the middle of battle. This gives the automatons additional slots for
 augments, but these augments are not always active. At any time, a 
person may switch out the augments for 3 action points, activating one 
augment but deactivating another augment. You may replace multiple 
augments at the same time all for the cost of 3 action points.
     



      This
 specialty works within the marque system. The amount of interchangeable
 slots the automaton has depends on the marque of its creator.
     



      1 interchangeable slot for an augment
     



      2 interchangeable slots for augments
     



      3 interchangeable slots for augments
     



      4 interchangeable slots for augments
     







      Steam-Powered Crafter
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      The
 first step in crafting your steamer, boilers are the machinery that 
powers your automaton and gives it motion and strength.  Your 
boiler is automatically housed within the automaton’s torso, onto which 
you can attach any body parts you wish.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several steamers based 
on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. The boilers in these 
steamers can then be upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments 
from this specialty, which can be selected under “boiler augments” 
below. These augments have marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with 
Marque I augments. As your skill in Automata improves, your marques will
 increase. See the “Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for 
more information.
     



      Each
 boiler can be upgraded with 3 augments. Sometimes an augment will take 
up multiple augment slots. For example, the “Flight” augment is worth 2 
slots, so a boiler only has 1 more available slot for an augment after 
“Flight” has been applied.
     







      Number of Steamers you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some steamers entirely 
out of scraps. These automatons must be constantly maintained by you and
 stop working soon after leaving your care. You may build and maintain a
 number of steamers for free based on your DIY score. You may build new 
steamers or augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Steamers z
     



      If you need to build a steamer that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      A
 steamer without augments will cost 50 princes. If you are building a 
steamer, the steamer will have a base materials cost. It is 1/5th the 
market price (10 princes).
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price for a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 10 princes.
     







      Using your Steamer
     



      Back
 in the day, steam-powered automatons used coal, so they were often 
large, hulking affairs that moved slowly and ate up a lot of fuel. 
Emperor Deylus Luthricien and the royalists changed that during the 
civil war when they integrated aether technology into their boilers for 
easier steam generation.  Now, steam-powered automatons are fast, 
lighter-weight, and can be controlled via remote controls and radio 
waves.
     







      Control Method c
     



      Steamers
 require the use of a two-handed remote control, emitting radio waves to
 the aether resonators inside the automatons. These remote controls 
allow the user to be up to 100 feet away and still control the 
automaton. The automaton can generally do anything a normal person could
 do (such as walking, jumping, fighting, and deflecting), and it takes 
the controller the same amount of action points to control the automaton
 as it would for a normal person to make the action (such as 1 action 
point to make the automaton move, or 2 action points to make the 
automaton attack). A single remote control can be used to control all of
 your automatons. Steamers have no action points of their own; 
therefore, if your steamer is hit with an attack that lowers its number 
of action points, your steamer is unaffected.
     







      Body of the Machine c
     



      Steamers
 will have a Boiler, which will be augmentable with 3 slots. One may 
later take Beta Boiler to improve on that. Body parts may then be added 
to the boiler.
     



      Your
 steamer (by default) is built with a head to house its radio receptors 
and a torso and groin to house its boiler. The two are connected via a 
neck support. To its torso you may attach either two arms or one unit of
 movement. Its groin may have a unit of movement attached to it. A unit 
of movement is either a set of legs, wheels, or a propulsion device. 
(See the Units of Movement sidebar for more information.)
     



      Your
 steamer has 0 hit points and 30 wounds. Any “bleeding” damage your 
steamer takes causes steam to erractically leak out of its boiler, 
making it take bleeding damage in the same fashion as any regular 
organism. In addition, the rigid structuring of your steamer’s boiler 
grants it an extra 3 soak class. As your automaton has no mind of its 
own, it cannot be affected by anything that requires Spirit or Cunning 
as a resist.
     







      Units of Movement
     



      Automatons will normally have a unit of movement attached to them. This could be a set of legs, wheels, or a propulsion device.
     







      Legs c
     



      Legs
 provide movement. Legs can easily traverse almost any terrain. By 
having a set of legs (typically two), an automaton will have a speed of 
20 feet, can walk up stairs, move over all degrees rough terrain, and 
generally have little problem getting about as do most tephrans. The 
legs do not allow the automaton to climb or swim. By having legs, the 
automaton can be affected by called shots to the legs.
     







      Wheels c
     



      Wheels
 allow for faster movement, though their are some clear disadvantages 
compared to legs. Wheels will give the automaton a speed of 30 feet, but
 the automaton will only be able to go up stairs at a speed of 10 feet, 
and the penalties for moving through rough terrain are doubled. The 
wheels do not allow the automaton to climb or swim. Wheels can be 
targeted as called shot locations - they have the same effects as legs.
     







      Propulsion Device c
     



      Sometimes
 legs and wheels don’t cut it. Underwater automatons will have 
propellers or automated fins. Some automatons will stand on wheels but 
use a rocket to propel them forward. A propulsion device will allow the 
automaton a speed of 20 feet (on either land, surface waters, or under 
water). The penalties for moving through rough terrain are doubled, and 
the propulsion device does not allow the automaton to climb or swim 
(unless the propulsion device is intended for underwater movement, in 
which case it does not allow the automaton to move across the land). If a
 propulsion device is targeted as a called shot location, it has the 
same effect as if it were a leg.
     







      Beta Boilers
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Automata & Steam-Powered Crafter specialty
     



      Your
 boilers are highly advanced yet difficult for most people to use. Such 
boilers can be upgraded with 2 more augments (bringing the total up to 5
 augmentable slots).
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta steamers, they 
must succeed in rolling a sciences result one tier higher than the 
highest marque you have on your steamer. If your steamer has a Marque IV
 augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can somehow 
obtain a tier result of 5 with their Sciences attribute).
     











      Prototype Boilers
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Automata, Steam-Powered Crafter, & Beta Boiler specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta boilers and made them user-friendly. Now anybody 
can control an automaton with a boiler that you designate as being a 
prototype.
     







      p Steamer Operator Specialties M
     



      Steamer Operator
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      As
 a practiced automaton fighter, you can make a steamer move just the way
 you want it to. Whenever you are operating a steamer, the steamer can 
use your accuracy, strike, defense, and evade.
     







      Steam Poser
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: Steam Operator & at least one stance known
     



      You
 know how to make a steamer accurately strike a pose. Steamers you 
control will automatically act as if they are in the same stance(s) as 
you. The instant you stop being a steamer’s current operator, the 
steamer loses all its stances.
     







      Steam Specialist
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Automata & Steam Operator specialty
     



      A
 true joystick master, you rise above any primitive control scheme put 
in front of you to make your steamer move just as you do. You can now 
modify the actions of any steamer you are operating with specialties you
 know.
     







      p Boiler Augments M
     



      Armored Boiler
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Boiler
     



      Your
 boiler has armoring built into it so that it won’t impede your steamer 
in any way. This increases your steamer’s natural soak class.
     



      +1 soak class
     



      +2 soak class
     



      +3 soak class
     



      +4 soak class
     







      Note: this augment stacks with the soak class bonus granted from the Brickhouse Boiler augment.
     







      Automated Boiler Repair
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      The
 boiler contains internal systems which patch up damage it receives. 
While this won’t remove wound effects, every turn it will replenish some
 wounds damage.
     



      1 wound repaired
     



      2 wounds repaired
     



      3 wounds repaired
     



      4 wounds repaired
     







      Brickhouse Boiler
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Boiler
     



      The walls of your boiler are exceptionally thick and well-insulated, protecting your steamer from damage.
     



      +1 soak class
     



      +2 soak class
     



      +3 soak class
     



      +4 soak class
     







      Note: this augment stacks with the soak class bonus granted from the Armored Boiler augment.
     







      Fire Absorbing
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      You
 need heat to make steam. Your boiler can already produce heat on its 
own, but you’re not opposed to other people helping it out. Any heat 
damage your steamer would take from being on fire instead heals it.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in automata.
     







      Easy Repairs
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      Used with the Automaton Repairs specialty
     



      The
 automaton is designed in a logical, accessible way that makes repairs 
easy. Whenever somebody is attempting to repair it via the Automaton 
Repairs specialty, they gain a bonus on their automata roll.
     



      +3 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     



      +6 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     



      +9 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     



      +12 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     







      Flight
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on a Boiler
     



      The
 automaton has been outfitted with a graviton sphere, allowing it to 
float and move. It can now fly, with its speed depending on the marque. 
Any speed penalties you take from armor will penalize this speed.
     



      5 feet of fly speed per action point
     



      10 feet of fly speed per action point
     



      15 feet of fly speed per action point
     



      25 feet of fly speed per action point
     







      Lightning Resistant
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      The automaton is naturally resistant to lightning and electricity. Electrical damage is now soakable as regular damage.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     



      Passenger
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      Your
 automaton has a hollow compartment inside, allowing people to ride 
inside and see out through eye holes or monitors of your design. While 
inside an automaton, a character cannot be directly targeted but they in
 turn cannot interact with anything outside of the automaton, although 
the automaton can still hear all voice commands. Any remote controls for
 the automaton can still control it from its passenger compartment. The 
number of people the automaton can hold is equal to the number of spaces
 it takes up. The amount of action points required by passengers to get 
into and out of the automaton is based on the marque of this augment.
     



      4 AP to enter or exit the automaton (can take multiple turns)
     



      3 AP to enter or exit the automaton
     



      2 AP to enter or exit the automaton
     



      1 AP to enter or exit the automaton
     







      Protected Core
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      If
 your automaton is defeated in battle, its insides are heavily 
safeguarded to allow for easy repair during your next breather. An 
automaton with a protected core can be entirely rebuilt in a matter of 
minutes. The automaton can be repaired up to a certain amount of maximum
 wounds, based on the marque. It cannot be repaired past its normal 
maximum number of wounds
     



      10 wounds after repairs
     



      20 wounds after repairs
     



      30 wounds after repairs
     



      40 wounds after repairs
     







      Realistic
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      You’ve
 designed the body of your automaton to look quite real, replicating the
 appearance of a living or imaginary creature. Any persons who looks 
upon it will believe it to be real unless they can beat the automaton’s 
roll with their Cunning. The automaton’s roll gains a bonus based on the
 marque of this augment.
     



      +5 to fool target
     



      +10 to foot target
     



      +15 to fool target
     



      +20 to fool target
     







      Reinforced Boiler
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      The boiler is all-around better built, granting it extra points of wounds.
     



      +10 wounds
     



      +20 wounds
     



      +30 wounds
     



      +40 wounds
     







      Resilient Boiler
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      Your steamer has a boiler any engineer would be proud of. Durable and reliable, your steamer has extra points of wounds.
     



      +10 wounds
     



      +20 wounds
     



      +30 wounds
     



      +40 wounds
     







      Remotely Remote Controlled
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      The
 automaton can be controlled from a great distance. If the user has no 
way of knowing what the automaton can see, they might be wasting 
commands.
     



      Up to 200 feet away
     



      Up to 2,000 feet away
     



      Up to 2 miles away
     



      Up to 20 miles away
     







      Shield Mode
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      Activation Cost: 2 AP (see below)
     



      Your
 automaton can hunker down into a solid dense mass for two of its 
controller’s action points, allowing it to be easily used as medium 
cover (+6 to evade against ranged attacks) for the same number of spaces
 it normally takes up. While in shield mode, your automaton cannot move 
or act. You can command it to exit this form for two action points. It 
also gains extra soak class while this ability is active.
     



      +1 soak class
     



      +2 soak class
     



      +3 soak class
     



      +4 soak class
     







      Tactile Controls
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      Your
 highly responsive control scheme allows your automaton to use your 
Dexterity as a bonus to its own as long as you’re are controlling it 
with a remote control.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      Test of Strength Controls
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      Your
 steamer has been outfitted with pressurized bags of steam which inflate
 and deflate to replicate the amount of torque placed on the joystick of
 its remote control. When the person piloting your steamer is using its 
remote control, the steamer is able to use its operator’s Brute as a 
bonus onto its own.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      Verbal Command Unit
     



      Boiler Augment
     



      If
 your automaton has the ability to hear you, you can now issue it verbal
 commands without the need for a remote control. It still costs you the 
same amount of action points to get it to perform any action since you 
have to guide the automaton through every intricacy of the actions they 
take. The last person to give your steamer any verbal commands is 
considered your steamer’s current operator. If your steamer is deafened,
 getting it to perform an action through verbal commands costs an extra 
action point.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      Crafting Fuse Boxes
     



      Fuse Box Builder
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      You
 can now create electric-powered automatons and upgrade the brainworks 
that power them and grant them artificial intelligence. Tephrans 
colloquially call them “fuse boxes.”
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain one fuse box. The 
brainworks of this fuse box can then be upgraded with augments. You’ll 
learn 2 augments from this specialty, which can be selected under 
“brainworks augments” below. These augments have marques. At lower 
levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. As your skill in Automata 
improves, your marques will increase. See the “Crafting” page at the 
beginning of this chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 brainworks can be upgraded with 3 augments. Sometimes an augment will 
take up multiple augment slots. For example, the “Lightning Soul” 
augment is worth 2 slots, so a brainworks unit only has 1 more available
 slot for an augment after “Lightning Soul” has been applied.
     







      Maintaining your Fuse Box  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build a single fuse box 
entirely out of scraps. This automaton must be constantly maintained by 
you and stops working soon after leaving your care. You can replace your
 fuse box automaton or augment your current one during any period of 
downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Fuse Boxes z
     



      If you need to build a fuse box that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      The
 fuse box, unaugmented, will have a base cost depending on its marque. 
(The marque will determine its number of action points per turn.) If you
 buy a fuse box and augments, you will add the price of the augments 
onto the price of the automaton.
     







      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price for a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 10 princes.
     







      Advanced Brainworks
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Automata & Fuse Box Builder specialty
     



      Your
 brainworks go far beyond what most other automata builders could 
conceptually imagine. Such brainworks have two more slots for you to 
place augments into.
     







      Superior Brainworks
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 6 skill points in Automata & Fuse Box Builder specialty
     



      Your
 brainworks are far more advanced than the common artificial 
intelligence. All brainworks you create with your DIY have 3 action 
points per turn instead of 2. Buying fuse boxes with superior brainworks
 costs 10,000 princes (a materials cost of 2,000 princes) on top of any 
other costs.
     







      Heroic Brainworks
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 9 skill points in Automata, Fuse Box Builder, & Superior Brainworks specialties
     



      Brainworks
 crafted with your DIY can fight with the tenacity of a great warrior 
and think at the speed of a quick-witted rogue. All brainworks you 
create with your DIY have 4 action points per turn instead of 3. Buying 
fuse boxes with superior brainworks costs 50,000 princes (a materials 
cost of 10,000 princes) on top of any other costs.
     







      Personality
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: Fuse Box Builder specialty
     



      It’s
 understandable for a gentleman adventurer to get lonely on the road. 
The cold embrace of an unfeeling automaton won’t stave off feelings of 
solitude for long. Luckily for you, there’s an easy solution: give that 
unfeeling automaton some feelings! Your brainworks can now be built with
 personality, making the fuse box you put them into feel the same 
emotional sensations as any other Tephran. This gives them the ability 
to gain stories (including ones from your nationality) and learn 
specialties from the Spirit attribute. Buying fuse boxes with 
personality costs 5,000 princes (a materials cost of 1,000 princes) on 
top of any other costs.
     



      Note: They still cannot gain DIY or augments through stories or specialties.
     







      Using your Fuse Box
     



      The
 first electric-powered automatons were invented by the Hazards, and 
later the technology was adapted and used to create numerous smaller and
 more efficient automatons that would protect the Hazardlands. Many 
Evanglessians called electric-powered automatons “Sparkers” or “Fuse 
Boxes.” Fuse Boxes have the most advanced sensory arrays, and can 
compute information to such an extent that they seem almost lifelike. 
This artificial intelligence is known as brainworks.
     







      Control Method c
     



      Fuse
 boxes use their brainworks to act independently. They begin as 
creations with 2 action points per turn. The sensory array allows the 
creator to give it verbal commands, like telling it to “attack that man”
 or “run to my side,” which costs the creator no action points. Your 
fuse box must roll priority separately from you as it is an autonomous 
being with its own turns.
     







      Body of the Machine c
     



      Fuse
 Boxes will begin with Brainworks, which has 3 slots that can be 
augmented. This can be upgraded with Advanced Brainworks, which gives 
the automaton more control over itself and an additional 2 slots for its
 brainworks. Body parts can then be added onto the brainworks.
     



      Your
 fuse box (by default) is built with a head to house its brainworks and a
 torso and groin to house its drive core. The two are connected via a 
neck support. To its torso you may attach either two arms or one unit of
 movement. Its groin may have a unit of movement attached to it. A unit 
of movement is either a set of legs, wheels, or a propulsion device. 
(See the Units of Movement sidebar for more information.)
     



      Your
 fuse box’s integrity comes from the electricity its brainworks 
produces, which at default is 8 hit points. Once out of hit points its 
brainworks is exposed and your automaton will begin to take wounds 
damage. Fuse boxes have only 12 points of wounds. Any “bleeding” damage 
your automaton takes causes lightning to shoot out of its electrical 
conduit, making it take bleeding damage in the same fashion as any 
regular organism.
     



      Fuse
 boxes have 2 action points per turn. As sentient machines, fuse boxes 
can learn specialties based on their marque. They act as if they have 1 
point in the skills they have specialties in for the purposes of 
prerequisites and for the specialty itself. This point does not increase
 their attributes at all.
     



      Has 1 specialty
     



      Has 2 specialties
     



      Has 3 specialties
     



      Has 5 specialties
     







      p Brainworks Augments M
     



      Alert
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      The automaton is always alert (unless when out of power or turned off), and will raise an alarm if its sensors pick up anything.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      Brute Physics
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Your
 brainworks is filled with meticulous physics calculators, allowing it 
to use the power of mind over matter to perform feats of incredible 
strength. It has a bonus to Brute.
     



      +3 Brute
     



      +12 Brute
     



      +31 Brute
     



      +47 Brute
     







      Dexterity Directory
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Your
 brainworks contains a vast directory of motion capture data taken from 
some of the world’s greatest acrobats and rogues. Whenever it needs 
them, your brainworks can make your automaton mimic these athletes, 
granting it a bonus to Dexterity.
     



      +3 Dexterity
     



      +12 Dexterity
     



      +31 Dexterity
     



      +47 Dexterity
     







      Easy Repairs
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Used with the Automaton Repairs specialty
     



      The
 automaton is designed in a logical, accessible way that makes repairs 
easy. Whenever somebody is attempting to repair it via the Automaton 
Repairs specialty, they gain a bonus on their Automata roll.
     



      +3 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     



      +6 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     



      +9 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     



      +12 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     







      Flight
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Takes up 2 augment slots on the Brainworks
     



      The
 automaton has been outfitted with a graviton sphere, allowing it to 
float and move. It can now fly, with its speed depending on the marque. 
Any speed penalties you take from armor will penalize this speed.
     



      5 feet of flight speed per action point
     



      10 feet of flight speed per action point
     



      15 feet of flight speed per action point
     



      20 feet of flight speed per action point
     







      Installed Cunning
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      You’ve
 given your automaton street-smarts and wit, allowing it to analyze the 
words of others and its surroundings, as well as allowing it to 
effectively gather new information. This grants it a bonus to Cunning.
     



      +3 Cunning
     



      +12 Cunning
     



      +31 Cunning
     



      +47 Cunning
     







      Lightning Soul
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Takes up 2 augment slots on the Brainworks
     



      Electricity
 is your fuse box’s blood, so when someone makes it bleed, they’re in 
for quite a shock! Whenever someone deals bleeding damage to your fuse 
box, including any taken from wounds or fatal effects, bolts of 
lightning erupt from its body into the person dealing the damage, as 
long as they are within 20 feet of your fusebox when dealing the damage.
 The victim of this augment is denied an evade roll.
     



      8 electric damage
     



      16 electric damage
     



      24 electric damage
     



      32 electric damage
     







      Linguistics
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Takes up 0 augment slots on the Brainworks
     



      The
 automaton has learned the basics of language and, with the addition of a
 soundbox in its mouth, can now process and recreate language.
     



      It can speak its creator’s language, though poorly
     



      It can speak its creator’s language fluently
     



      It can speak three languages fluently
     



      It can speak ten languages fluently
     







      Note:
 As an augment that takes up 0 slots, the cost to apply Linguistics to 
an automaton is half as much as a normal augment (rounded down).
     







      Mechanical Sharpness
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      The fusebox can make precisely timed actions, granting it a bonus on its accuracy rolls.
     



      +2 Accuracy
     



      +4 Accuracy
     



      +6 Accuracy
     



      +8 Accuracy
     







      Passenger
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Your
 automaton has a hollow compartment inside, allowing people to ride 
inside and see out through eye holes or monitors of your design. While 
inside an automaton, a character cannot be directly targeted but they in
 turn cannot interact with anything outside of the automaton, although 
the automaton can still hear all voice commands. The number of people 
the automaton can hold is equal to the number of spaces it takes up. The
 amount of action points required by passengers to get into and out of 
the automaton is based on the marque of this augment.
     



      4 AP to enter or exit the automaton (can take multiple turns)
     



      3 AP to enter or exit the automaton
     



      2 AP to enter or exit the automaton
     



      1 AP to enter or exit the automaton
     







      Protected Core
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      If
 your automaton is defeated in battle, its insides are heavily 
safeguarded to allow for easy repair during your next breather. An 
automaton with a protected core can be entirely rebuilt in a matter of 
minutes. The automaton can be repaired up to a certain amount of maximum
 wounds, based on the marque. It cannot be repaired past its normal 
maximum number of wounds
     



      10 wounds after repairs
     



      20 wounds after repairs
     



      30 wounds after repairs
     



      40 wounds after repairs
     







      Realistic
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      You’ve
 designed the body of your automaton to look quite real, replicating the
 appearance of a living or imaginary creature. Any persons who looks 
upon it will believe it to be real unless they can beat the automaton’s 
roll with their Cunning. The automaton’s roll gains a bonus based on the
 marque of this augment.
     



      +5 to fool target
     



      +10 to foot target
     



      +15 to fool target
     



      +20 to fool target
     







      Scientific Database
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Your
 automaton is a walking library of information and has deep 
understanding on the inner workings of itself and other machines, 
granting it a bonus to Sciences.
     



      +3 Sciences
     



      +12 Sciences
     



      +31 Sciences
     



      +47 Sciences
     







      Shock Absorber
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Carefully
 hidden miniature conduits across your fusebox’s body allow it to soak 
electric damage normally, even if the electric attack states it denies 
soak or defense. Any electric damage it soaks is harnessed for energy, 
replenishing your fusebox’s hit points.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in automata.
     



      Slippery Circuits
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Your
 automaton always seems to slip right out from under its attackers. Its 
sensors are in full usage, fully optimizing the automaton for jumping 
away from harm. It gains a bonus of evade rolls.
     



      +2 Evade
     



      +3 Evade
     



      +4 Evade
     



      +5 Evade
     







      Spiritual Connection
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Requires: Brainworks built with Personality
     



      Your
 brainworks better understands what it means to be ‘alive’ and has been 
programmed with the mental fortitude of a monk. This allows the 
automaton to better replicate and control its Tephran emotions, granting
 it bonuses to Spirit.
     



      +3 Spirit
     



      +12 Spirit
     



      +31 Spirit
     



      +47 Spirit
     







      Targeting Program
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Your brainworks can zero in on a target, calculating the exact attack trajectory required to hit them.
     



      +2 Accuracy
     



      +4 Accuracy
     



      +6 Accuracy
     



      +8 Accuracy
     







      Fuse Box Specialist
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Your
 fusebox is better at using its specialties. Instead of having 1 point 
in their skills for using their specialties and for prerequisites, they 
use the following numbers:
     



      2 skill points for specialties
     



      4 skill points for specialties
     



      10 skill points for specialties
     



      18 skill points for specialties
     







      Master Fuse Box
     



      Brainworks Augment
     



      Requires: fusebox augmented with Fuse Box Specialist augment
     



      Your
 fusebox is a master of using their specialties. They have an additional
 skill bonus for their specialties and for prerequisites on top of their
 Fusebox Specialist augment
     



      +1 skill points for specialties
     



      +3 skill points for specialties
     



      +5 skill points for specialties
     



      +7 skill points for specialties
     







      Crafting Clockworks
     



      Clockwork Crafter
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      You
 can now create new kinetically-powered automatons and upgrade the 
analytical engine that controls its pre-determined responses. Tephrans 
colloquially call them “clockworks.”
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several clockworks based
 on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. The analytical engines of 
these clockworks can then be upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 
augments from this specialty, which can be selected under “analytics 
augments” below. These augments have marques. At lower levels, you’ll 
start with Marque I augments. As your skill in Automata improves, your 
marques will increase. See the “Crafting” page at the beginning of this 
chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 analytics can be upgraded with 3 augments. Sometimes an augment will 
take up multiple augment slots. For example, the “flight” augment is 
worth 2 slots, so an analytics unit only has 1 more available slot for 
an augment after “flight” has been applied.
     







      Number of Clockworks you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some clockworks entirely 
out of scraps. These automatons must be constantly maintained by you and
 stop working soon after leaving your care. You may build and maintain a
 number of clockworks for free based on your DIY score. You may build 
new clockworks or augment old ones during any period of downtime you 
have.
     







      The Cost of Clockworks z
     



      If you need to build a clockwork that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      A
 clockwork without augments will cost 50 princes. If you are building a 
clockwork, the clockwork will have a base materials cost. It is 1/5th 
the market price (10 princes).
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price for a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 10 princes.
     







      Advanced Analytics
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Automata & Clockwork Crafter specialty
     



      Your
 analytics go far beyond what most other automata builders could 
conceptually imagine. Such analytics have two more slots for you to 
place augments into.
     







      Using your Clockworks
     



      Clockwork
 automatons are the oldest automatons, as Velkya, the founder of 
Evangless, was fond of using them. Clockwork automatons have come a long
 way, however, and now use analytical engines to evaluate their 
surroundings and enact pre-programmed responses. Clockworks can now work
 for hours and hours without needing any maintenance (or winding up, as 
it would be).
     



      Control Method c
     



      Clockworks
 work by using pre-programmed responses called Directives. Without a 
Directive augmented onto them, a clockwork will not make any actions. 
Each directive acts separately from the rest. Clockworks don’t have 
action points, and require no action points from its master to function.
 Therefore if your clockwork is hit with an attack that lowers its 
number of action points for a turn, your clockwork is unaffected. 
Outside of combat you can temporarily turn off and on some (or all) of 
your clockwork’s directives to avoid it attacking townsfolk.
     







      Body of the Machine c
     



      Clockworks
 will begin with an analytical engine, which has 3 slots to be augmented
 with pre-programmed responses. This can be upgraded with Advanced 
Analytics, which allows for 2 more slots. Some crafters learn how to 
make punch cards, to re-program their clockworks on the spots. Body 
parts can then be added onto the analytical engine.
     



      Your
 clockwork (by default) is built with a head to house its analytical 
engine and a torso and groin to house its perpetual motion clockwork. 
The two are connected via a neck support. To its torso you may attach 
either two arms or one unit of movement. Its groin may have a unit of 
movement attached to it. A unit of movement is either a set of legs, 
wheels, or a propulsion device. (See the Units of Movement sidebar for 
more information.)
     



      Clockworks
 have no hit points and 20 points of wounds. Any “bleeding” damage your 
automaton takes causes springs and cogs to pop out of place within its 
clockwork, making it take bleeding damage in the same fashion as any 
regular organism.
     







     p Analytics Augments M
     



      Avenge-Me Directive
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Your
 analytical engine thoughtlessly fights back against those who try and 
harm the target of this augment. When applying this augment, choose 
someone (usually yourself) to be its target. When the target of this 
augment is attacked and the attacker is within range of this clockwork, 
the clockwork will automatically attack the attacker once, using a 
weapon if it is wielding one. The number of times the clockwork will do 
this per combat turn is determined by the marque of this augment.
     



      Will perform this action once
     



      Will perform this action twice
     



      Will perform this action twice
     



      Will perform this action thrice
     







      Defend-Your-Area Directive
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Your
 clockwork attacks personnel who enter a space adjacent to them, 
exempting anyone you’ve pre-programmed them to see as an ally (usually 
you and any party members you don’t want your automaton to chop into 
pieces). They will perform this action a number of times per combat turn
 determined by the marque of this augment. If they are blinded to or 
cannot recognize someone they are pre-programmed to see as an ally, they
 will attack them using this augment. They will only attack a specific 
target once per adjacent space they walk through per turn.
     



      Will act out this directive once
     



      Will act out this directive twice
     



      Will act out this directive twice
     



      Will act out this directive thrice
     







      Do-Not-Die Component
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Your clockwork is designed to take more hits before its inevitable destruction, not that it cares.
     



      +10 wounds
     



      +20 wounds
     



      +30 wounds
     



      +40 wounds
     







      Easy Repairs
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Used with the Automaton Repairs specialty
     



      The
 automaton is designed in a logical, accessible way that makes repairs 
easy. Whenever somebody is attempting to repair it via the Automaton 
Repairs specialty, they gain a bonus on their automata roll.
     



      +3 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     



      +6 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     



      +9 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     



      +12 on the Automaton Repairs rolls
     







      Flight
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Takes up 2 augment slots on the Brainworks
     



      The
 automaton has been outfitted with a graviton sphere, allowing it to 
float and move. It can now fly, with its speed depending on the marque. 
Any speed penalties you take from armor will penalize this speed.
     



      5 feet of flight speed per action point
     



      10 feet of flight speed per action point
     



      15 feet of flight speed per action point
     



      20 feet of flight speed per action point
     







      Follow-Me Directive
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Your
 clockwork will aimlessly follow the target of this augment. When 
applying this augment, choose someone (usually yourself) to be its 
target. Whenever the target of this augment moves, this clockwork will 
move as far as it can in the same direction, attempting to get to a 
space adjacent to them.
     



      Will move toward their target once per turn
     



      Will move toward their target twice per turn
     



      Will move toward their target three times per turn
     



      Will move toward their target four times per turn
     







      Go-There Directive
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP (see below)
     



      Your
 clockwork is programmed to move where you want it to, although its 
analytical engine needs guidance when doing so. When applying this 
augment, choose someone (usually yourself) to be its target. For 1 
action point the target of this augment can, through pointing and 
probably yelling, make your clockwork move once. If your clockwork has a
 separate directive that makes it move, directing your clockwork 
somewhere with this augment will not prevent it from carrying out the 
other directive the first chance it gets.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     



      Hedge-Your-Area Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Defend-Your-Area Directive augment
     



      When
 someone causes your automaton to act out their Defend-Your-Area 
Directive, your clockwork is pre-programmed to not fail its programmer. 
It gains an accuracy bonus on any attacks made while acting out the 
Defend-Your-Area Directive.
     



      +3 Accuracy
     



      +6 Accuracy
     



      +9 Accuracy
     



      +12 Accuracy
     







      Hit-Them Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Avenge-Me Directive augment
     



      When
 your automaton acts out its Avenge-Me Directive it is accurate about 
doing so. It gains an accuracy bonus on any attacks made while acting 
out the Avenge-Me Directive.
     



      +3 Accuracy
     



      +6 Accuracy
     



      +9 Accuracy
     



      +12 Accuracy
     







      Hurt-Them Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Avenge-Me Directive augment
     



      Your
 analytical engine is designed to mindlessly put all of its strength 
into dealing more damage whenever it acts out its Avenge-Me Directive. 
It gains a strike bonus on any attacks made while acting out the 
Avenge-Me Directive.
     



      +4 Strike
     



      +8 Strike
     



      +12 Strike
     



      +16 Strike
     







      Lightning Resistant
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      The automaton is naturally resistant to lightning and electricity. Electrical damage is now soakable as regular damage.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in automata.
     







      March-There Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Go-There Directive augment
     



      More
 people can guide your clockwork’s aimless wandering around the 
battlefield. Based on the marque of this augment, you can program in 
more targets for your Go-There Directive.
     



      One additional guide
     



      Two additional guides
     



      Three additional guides
     



      Four additional guides
     







      Mark-Your-Area Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Defend-Your-Area Directive augment
     



      When
 someone causes your automaton to act out their Defend-Your-Area 
Directive, your clockwork is designed to make their prey regret it. It 
gains a strike bonus on any attacks made while acting out the 
Defend-Your-Area Directive.
     



      +4 Strike
     



      +8 Strike
     



      +12 Strike
     



      +16 Strike
     







      Passenger
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Your
 automaton has a hollow compartment inside, allowing people to ride 
inside and see out through eye holes or monitors of your design. While 
inside an automaton, a character cannot be directly targeted but they in
 turn cannot interact with anything outside of the automaton, although 
the automaton can still hear all voice commands. The number of people 
the automaton can hold is equal to the number of spaces it takes up. The
 amount of action points required by passengers to get into and out of 
the automaton is based on the marque of this augment.
     



      4 AP to enter or exit the automaton (can take multiple turns)
     



      3 AP to enter or exit the automaton
     



      2 AP to enter or exit the automaton
     



      1 AP to enter or exit the automaton
     







      Protect-Me Directive
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Your
 clockwork will witlessly jump in the way of attacks made against the 
target of this augment. When applying this augment, choose someone 
(usually yourself) to be its target. When adjacent to the target of this
 augment, this clockwork will take damage in their stead. This clockwork
 will only do this a certain number of times per turn determined by the 
marque of this augment.
     



      Will take damage instead of their target once per turn
     



      Will take damage instead of their target twice per turn
     



      Will take damage instead of their target thrice per turn
     



      Will take damage instead of their target four times per turn
     







      Protect-Us Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Protect-Me Directive augment
     



      You
 can program in additional targets (usually other party members) of your
 automaton’s Protect-Me Directive, although they still must be adjacent 
to any persons they attempt to protect.
     



      1 additional protectee
     



      2 additional protectees
     



      3 additional protectees
     



      4 additional protectees
     







      Protect-Yourself Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Protect-Me Directive augment
     



      When
 your automaton acts out its Protect-Me Directive it is better about 
protecting itself. It gains a defense bonus while acting out the 
Protect-Me Directive.
     



      +4 Defense
     



      +8 Defense
     



      +12 Defense
     



      +16 Defense
     







      Protected Core
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      If
 your automaton is defeated in battle, its insides are heavily 
safeguarded to allow for easy repair during your next breather. An 
automaton with a protected core can be entirely rebuilt in a matter of 
minutes. The automaton can be repaired up to a certain amount of maximum
 wounds, based on the marque. It cannot be repaired past its normal 
maximum number of wounds.
     



      10 wounds after repairs
     



      20 wounds after repairs
     



      30 wounds after repairs
     



      40 wounds after repairs
     







      Realistic
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      You’ve
 designed the body of your automaton to look quite real, replicating the
 appearance of a living or imaginary creature. Any persons who looks 
upon it will believe it to be real unless they can beat the automaton’s 
roll with their Cunning. The automaton’s roll gains a bonus based on the
 marque of this augment.
     



      +5 to fool target
     



      +10 to foot target
     



      +15 to fool target
     



      +20 to fool target
     







      Run-There Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Go-There Directive augment
     



      While
 your analytical engine still has difficulties following directions, it 
is faster in getting to its destination once you set it on the right 
path. It gains a speed bonus while acting out the Go-There Directive.
     



      +5 feet of movement
     



      +10 feet of movement
     



      +15 feet of movement
     



      +25 feet of movement
     







      Shadow-Me Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Go-There Directive augment
     



      Your
 clockwork is designed to stay beside its target no matter what. 
Whenever your clockwork acts out its Follow-Me Directive, it can make 
one additional movement towards its target per combat turn.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      Secure-Your-Area Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Defend-Your-Area Directive augment
     



      If
 someone attempts to attack your automaton while already in a space 
adjacent to them, your automaton will spend one of its Defend-Your-Area 
Directive actions (if it has any available) attacking them after they 
finish their attack. They still will not attack anyone programmed into 
them as a friendly.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      Shield-Yourself Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Protect-Me Directive augment
     



      When
 your automaton acts out its Protect-Me Directive it won’t take as much 
damage. It gains a soak class bonus while acting out the Protect-Me 
Directive.
     



      +1 soak class
     



      +2 soak class
     



      +3 soak class
     



      +4 soak class
     







      Spring-Into-Action Component
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Takes up 2 augment slots on the Brainworks
     



      You’ve
 made sure that anyone who attempts to damage the inner clockwork of 
your automaton will rue the day they do. Whenever someone deals bleeding
 damage to your wind-up, including any taken from wounds or fatal 
effects, the clockwork that springs out has been barbed and serrated and
 will fly in the direction of the person who dealt the damage. With a 
range of 10 feet, the victim of this augment is denied an evade roll.
     



      8 damage
     



      16 damage
     



      24 damage
     



      32 damage
     







      Sprint-to-Me Subdirective
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      Requires: Analytics with the Follow-Me Directive augment
     



      Your
 clockwork’s body inanely lurches towards its target as fast as its body
 will allow. Your automaton can move further per movement whenever it is
 carrying out its Follow-Me Directive.
     



      +10 feet of movement
     



      +20 feet of movement
     



      +30 feet of movement
     



      +40 feet of movement
     







      Stay-Alive Component
     



      Analytics Augment
     



      You’ve
 built your wind-up to continue following its pre-programmed directives 
well past when most other automatons would have fallen on the 
battlefield.
     



      +10 wounds
     



      +20 wounds
     



      +30 wounds
     



      +40 wounds
     







      Crafting Prosthetics
     



      Prosthetician
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      You
 now have the ability to craft mechanical prosthetics onto people or 
augment the limbs of automatons. When you create a prosthetic for a 
person, it works as a limb replacement. Of course, once you affix your 
prosthetics with hidden cannons, chainsaws, and ridiculous pistons, the 
comparison stops there.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several prosthetics 
based on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. The prosthetics can 
then be upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this 
specialty, which can be selected under “universal prosthetic augments,” 
“prosthetic arm augments,” “prosthetic hand augments,” or “prosthetic 
leg augments,” below. These augments have marques. At lower levels, 
you’ll start with Marque I augments. As your skill in Automata improves,
 your marques will increase. See the “Crafting” page at the beginning of
 this chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 prosthetic can be upgraded with 3 augments. Some materials can only be 
upgraded twice (like wooden prosthetics) or just once (like organic 
ones). Sometimes an augment will take up multiple augment slots. For 
example, if an augment is worth 2 slots, a prosthetic only has 1 more 
available slot for an augment after the 2-slot augment has been applied.
     







      Number of Prosthetics you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some prosthetics entirely
 out of scraps. These prosthetics must be constantly maintained by you 
and stop working soon after leaving your care. You may build and 
maintain a number of prosthetics for free based on your DIY score. You 
may build new prosthetics or augment old ones during any period of 
downtime you have.
     



      Replacing both an arm and hand does count as 2 prosthetics.
     







      The Cost of Prosthetics z
     



      If you need to build prosthetics that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      A
 prosthetic without augments will cost 25 princes at market value. If 
you are building a prosthetic, the prosthetic will have a base materials
 cost. It is 1/5th the market price (5 princes).
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price for a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 5 princes.
     







      Using Prosthetics
     



      When
 you first learn to make prosthetics (through the Prosthetician 
specialty), you can make and augment hands, arms, and legs. If somebody 
is missing a hand, arm, or leg, you can replace it with a prosthetic. 
The only lasting penalty to having a prosthetic limb is the permanent 
loss of wounds that come from losing a limb. Universal prosthetic 
augments can go on any prosthetics.
     







      Wounds & Fatals c
     



      If
 you suffer a wound or fatal effect against a prosthetic, the effect is 
the same, except that you cannot bleed out by having a severed 
prosthetic.
     







      Upgrading Automaton Limbs c
     



      You
 can add prosthetics onto an automaton or augment its default limbs. If 
you upgrade the existing limbs, it counts against your limit of 
prosthetics you can make and maintain with your DIY score.
     







      Beta Prosthetics
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Automata & Prosthetician specialty
     



      Your
 prosthetics are quite complex, but they can accomplish quite a bit. 
Such prosthetics can be upgraded with 2 more augments (bringing the 
total for metal prosthetics up to 5 augmentable slots).
     



      You
 can only apply beta prosthetics to yourself and automatons that were 
created by you as either beta (for boilers) or advanced (for analytics 
and brainworks) models.
     







      Prototype Prosthetics
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Automata, Prosthetician, & Beta Prosthetics specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta prosthetics and made them user-friendly. Now 
anybody can use a prosthetic that you designate as being a prototype.
     







      Automata Tinkerer
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Automata & Prosthetician specialty
     



      You
 can augment all pieces of your automatons - from their eyes to their 
ears to their torsos. You can learn augments for every part of the 
automaton’s body.
     



      If
 you have Automata Upgrader, you can use that in conjuction with 
Automata Tinkerer, causing all of the automaton’s body parts to not cost
 anything or count against your Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score.
     







      Automata Upgrader
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 3 skill points in Automata & Prosthetician specialty
     



      You’ve
 tinkered and played with your automatons so much that you no longer use
 your Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score to determine how many of your 
automaton’s limbs you can upgrade. Whenever you are augmenting the 
default limbs of your automatons, those limbs do not count against the 
maximum number of prosthetics you can create.
     







      Nerve Crafting
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: 7 skill points in Automata & Prosthetician specialty
     



      It
 is normally impossible to attach a prosthetic arm to one’s ribcage, or a
 prosthetic hand to one’s spine. You, however, have learned how to 
create nerve endings in a person where none should exist. You may now 
apply extra prosthetics to a person beyond what they could normally 
handle (allowing you to add a third arm, an extra hand, maybe even 
another leg).
     



      When
 you nerve craft somebody, they permanently lose 1 wound in order to 
gain the prosthetic. They gain the wound back if they surgically remove 
the prosthetic.
     







      Sensory Builder
     



      Automata Specialty
     



      Requires: Prosthetician specialty
     



      Some
 of the most difficult things to create prosthetics for are one’s ears 
and eyes, but you’ve learned the craft. You may now create prosthetics 
for ears and eyes, and they count against your maximum crafting amount 
of prosthetics based on your Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score.
     







      p Universal Prosthetic Augments M
     



      Acid Sprayer
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      You
 can insert doses of alchemical acids into the prosthetic. When used in 
an unarmed attack, the body part will spray a single dose of acid onto 
your target. Luckily the acid is held in such a way that it will not 
damage your body part. Depending on the marque of this augment, your 
body part can hold a certain number of acid doses. It costs 3 action 
points to add in a single additional dose of acid.
     



      Maximum of Two Doses
     



      Maximum of Three Doses
     



      Maximum of Four Doses
     



      Maximum of Six Doses
     



      Note: For the crafting of acids, see Alchemy.
     







      Air Blaster
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Resist: Brute (marques down)
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP
     



      Powerful
 ventilators have been built into your body part, allowing you to blow a
 strong, concentrated stream of pure air straight at an opponent within 
your 25 feet of range. They cannot evade your air blast, but they can 
resist with their Brute.
     



      Your target is pushed back 5 feet
     



      Your target is pushed back 5 feet
     



      Your target is pushed back 10 feet
     



      Your target is pushed back 15 feet
     







      Air Conditioner
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Requires: Prosthetic with the Air Blaster augment
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP (see below)
     



      You
 are able to superheat or supercool the air from your air blaster, 
causing it to deal either heat or freezing damage whenever you use it, 
in addition to its normal effects. For one action point, you can switch 
your air blaster between heat and freezing damage or turn the effects of
 this augment on and off. The damage is soakable.
     



      2 heat or freezing damage
     



      4 heat or freezing damage
     



      6 heat or freezing damage
     



      8 heat or freezing damage
     







      Air Tunnel
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Requires: Prosthetic with the Air Blaster augment
     



      Your
 air blaster has been overclocked, causing its normal gust of wind to 
become a miniature tornado erupting from your body part. Whenever you 
successfully push back your target with your air blaster, they are moved
 an additional 5 feet backwards. In addition, this augment increases 
your air blaster’s range.
     



      5 additional feet of range
     



      10 additional feet of range
     



      15 additional feet of range
     



      20 additional feet of range
     







      Barbed
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      You’ve
 laced the body part with spikes of your design. Whenever someone 
attempts to grab the body part, you get a bonus on your roll to avoid 
it.
     



      +2 on the evade roll
     



      +4 on the evade roll
     



      +6 on the evade roll
     



      +8 on the evade roll
     







      Brute Enhancement
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      The body part is built for rigidity and power. When the body part is involved in a Brute roll, it gains a bonus.
     



      +2 to Brute
     



      +4 to Brute
     



      +6 to Brute
     



      +8 to Brute
     







      Cold Iron
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Requires: Body Part must be made of metal & the Freezer Augment somewhere on subject’s body
     



      This
 prosthetic leaks small amounts of liquid nitrogen diverted from your 
freezer. Whenever someone comes into contact with this body part, 
whether it be them grabbing you or you punching them, they suffer first 
degree frostbite. This means they will suffer increased sensitivity to 
heat and cold lasting until their next breather. This augment 
deactivates if your freezer is extinguished. This effect will not stack 
with multiple exposures to a cold iron body part.
     



      Target suffers a -3 when resisting effects caused by heat, flames, cold, or ice
     



      Target suffers a -6 when resisting effects caused by heat, flames, cold, or ice
     



      Target suffers a -9 when resisting effects caused by heat, flames, cold, or ice
     



      Target
 suffers a -12 when resisting effects caused by heat, flames, cold, or 
ice
     







      Compartment
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Your
 prosthetic has a small hollow container inside of it, allowing the 
storage of different items. It costs one action point to take an item 
out of your compartment.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      Disguised
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      The
 prosthetic is disguised as either being a regular part of the body or 
being covered in something so that it does not appear to be mechanical, 
and is built to be silent and react like a normal body part. In order to
 notice your prosthetic for what it truly is, opponents must roll 
Cunning.
     



      Tier 2 Cunning to notice
     



      Tier 3 Cunning to notice
     



      Tier 3 Cunning to notice
     



      Tier 4 Cunning to notice
     







      Note:
 Organic body parts act one marque higher than normal. If this would 
make it a Marque V, the body part is indistinguishable from a normal 
limb unless somebody can get a Tier 5 Cunning result to notice.
     







      Flame Exhausts
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Requires: Furnace Augment somewhere on subject’s body
     



      Resist: Dexterity (marques down)
     



      Activation Cost: 3 AP
     



      Exhausts
 protrude from the prosthetic, flames periodically leaking out of them. 
For three action points you cause the body part to spray flames onto 
everyone adjacent to you to set them on fire, although they can still 
attempt to resist the attack. You cannot activate your flame exhausts if
 your furnace is extinguished.
     



      Tier 1 Burning: 2 unsoakable damage per turn, 2 AP to put out the fire
     



      Tier 1 Burning: 2 unsoakable damage per turn, 2 AP to put out the fire
     



      Tier
 2 Burning: 4 unsoakable damage per turn, 4 AP to put out the fire, 
wooden and cloth items destroyed
     



      Tier
 3 Burning: 8 unsoakable damage per turn, 8 AP to put out the fire, 
wooden and cloth items destroyed
     







      Freeze Exhausts
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Requires: Freezer augment somewhere on subject’s body
     



      Resist: Brute (marques down)
     



      Activation Cost: 3 AP
     



      Exhausts
 protrude from the prosthetic, icy mist periodically leaking out of it. 
For three action points you cause the body part to spray this mist onto 
everyone adjacent to you, although they can still attempt to resist the 
attack. This mist causes your target’s body temperature to rapidly drop,
 making them sluggish until the start of your next turn. You cannot 
activate your freeze exhausts if your freezer is extinguished.
     



      Target suffers a -2 to evade
     



      Target suffers a -4 to evade
     



      Target suffers a -6 to evade
     



      Target suffers a -8 to evade
     







      Freezer
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      A
 cooler filled with liquid nitrogen has been built into your prosthetic.
 This keeps your body cool even in the hottest of environments. However,
 if the body part is hit by an attack dealing heat damage, the liquid 
nitrogen inside will evaporate rapidly, extinguishing your freezer. It 
costs 1 action point to extinguish the freezer yourself, and it will 
cost action points to reactivate your freezer when extinguished 
depending on the augment’s marque.
     



      2 AP to reactivate
     



      1 AP to reactivate
     



      0 AP to reactivate
     



      0 AP reflexively to reactivate (can do out of turn)
     







      Furnace
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Fueled
 by coal or aether, a live flame burns within you. It keeps your entire 
body warm, allowing you to take no penalties in subzero environments. If
 the body part gets splashed with water it will automatically extinguish
 the flames inside. It costs 1 action point to extinguish the furnace 
yourself, and it will cost action points to reactivate your furnace when
 extinguished depending on the augment’s marque.
     



      2 AP to reactivate
     



      1 AP to reactivate
     



      0 AP to reactivate
     



      0 AP reflexively to reactivate (can do out of turn)
     







      Note: Your furnace is self-contained and will not burn you, though you cannot apply the furnace augment to a wooden prosthetic.
     







      Glowing
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Your
 prosthetic shines through the darkness either from a glow-in-the-dark 
coating, numerous lightbulbs placed in it, or another source of built-in
 light. Light shines outward from you, dispelling darkness and allowing 
those within its range to see normally. This can be activated and 
repressed for 1 action point.
     



      Light extends to spaces adjacent to you
     



      Light extends outwards up to 10 feet away
     



      Light extends outwards up to 15 feet away
     



      Light extends outwards up to 20 feet away
     







      Hidden Blade
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Requires: Prosthetic augmented with Weapon Mounting
     



      The
 prosthetic has a secret weapon hidden inside that can flip out at a 
moment’s notice. For no action point cost, you can now retract your 
weapon into your body, as long as the weapon would normally be 
concealable.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      Hidden Claymore
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Requires: Prosthetic augmented with Hidden Blade
     



      The
 prosthetic can fit an enormous weapon inside it by breaking down its 
key components. For no action point cost you can now retract your weapon
 into your body, even if the weapon would normally not be concealable.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      Hot Iron
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Requires: Prosthetic must be made of metal & the Furnace augment somewhere on subject’s body
     



      As
 long as fire burns within your body, it constantly heats up this body 
part, making it burn to the touch. Whenever someone comes into contact 
with this body part, whether it be them grabbing you or you punching 
them, they take a small amount of heat damage. This doesn’t apply if 
your furnace is extinguished.
     



      2 heat damage
     



      4 heat damage
     



      6 heat damage
     



      8 heat damage
     







      Overglow
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Requires: Prosthetic with the Glowing Augment
     



      Resist: Cunning (marques down)
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP
     



      Light
 erupts from your prosthetic, arcing toward a single target within 25 
feet with the potential to blind them (giving them a -4 on accuracy and 
evade rolls). They can resist with their Cunning attribute.
     



      Blinds for one turn
     



      Blinds for two turns
     



      Blinds for three turns
     



      Blinds for four turns
     







      Poison Injector
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      You
 can insert doses of alchemical poison into the prosthetic. When used in
 an unarmed attack, a single dose of the poisons held inside will 
automatically inject themselves into your target. Depending on the 
marque of this augment, your body part can hold a certain number of 
poison doses. It costs 3 action points to add in a single additional 
dose of poison.
     



      Maximum of 1 Dose
     



      Maximum of 2 Doses
     



      Maximum of 3 Doses
     



      Maximum of 4 Doses
     







      Note: For the crafting of poisons, see Alchemy.
     







      Precision
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      The body part is built for precision and flexibility. When the body part is involved in a Dexterity roll, it gains a bonus.
     



      +2 to Dexterity
     



      +4 to Dexterity
     



      +6 to Dexterity
     



      +8 to Dexterity
     







      Reinforced
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      The prosthetic is strengthened with internal plating, granting it a resist against called shots.
     



      +4 to resist when struck
     



      +8 to resist when struck
     



      +12 to resist when struck
     



      +16 to resist when struck
     







      Removable
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      The
 prosthetic is easily removable and replaceable. If other body parts are
 connected to it (e.g. if this is placed on the arm, and a hand is 
attached to the arm) they are removed along with this body part.
     



      4 AP to remove
     



      3 AP to remove
     



      2 AP to remove
     



      1 AP to remove
     







      Smokestack
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      Requires: Furnace augment or Freezer augment somewhere on subject’s body
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP (see below)
     



      A
 chimney or metal gratings constantly release clouds of smoke or fog 
from your furnace. This cloud billows out around you, making you and 
those within a certain range completely blinded. This will instantly end
 if your furnace or freezer is extinguished. You can spend one action 
point to start your smokescreen or to adjust the range of the cloud from
 affecting characters adjacent to you up to its maximum range detailed 
by the marque of this augment.
     



      Only characters adjacent to you are blinded
     



      Anyone up to 10 feet of you are blinded
     



      Anyone up to 15 feet of you are blinded
     



      Anyone up to 20 feet of you are blinded
     







      Weapon Mounting
     



      Universal Prosthetic Augment
     



      A
 weapon of some kind can be mounted into the prosthetic in such a way 
that in order to sunder or disarm the weapon, the body part itself must 
be sundered or removed. The weapon can be removed or put into the weapon
 mounting for 1 action point.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      p Prosthetic Arm Augments M
     



      Extendable Hand
     



      Prosthetic Arm Augment
     



      Requires: placed on an arm with an attached hand
     



      The
 hand attached to your augmented appendage can now be extended outward, 
whether it be with springs, hydraulics, or some other such method. It 
costs one action point to extend a limb but no action points to retract 
it. Extended hands function as normal, able to do anything they normally
 could do.
     



      +5 feet of reach
     



      +10 feet of reach
     



      +10 feet of reach
     



      +15 feet of reach
     







      Grasper
     



      Prosthetic Arm Augment
     



      A
 grasper is a small set of pincers that can wield an item just like a 
hand. A grasper is not dexterous enough to wield items in conjunction 
with other limbs, preventing it from being able to use two-handed items.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      p Prosthetic Hand Augments M
     



      Flame Pores
     



      Prosthetic Hand Augment
     



      Requires: Furnace augment somewhere on subject’s body
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP (after a successful unarmed attack)
     



      Holes
 in the limb make it expel flames from your furnace when it is used in 
an unarmed strike. As long as your furnace isn’t extinguished, you can 
spend 1 action point after a successful unarmed attack in order to burn 
your target. Multiple burns caused by your flame pores will not stack 
the penalties to a single target’s defense. These burns will go away 
during the foe’s next breather.
     



      Tier 1 Burns (-1 on all defense rolls)
     



      Tier 2 Burns (-3 on all defense rolls)
     



      Tier 3 Burns (-5 on all defense rolls)
     



      Tier 4 Burns (-7 on all defense rolls)
     







      Freezing Pores
     



      Prosthetic Hand Augment
     



      Requires: Freezer augment somewhere on subject’s body
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP (after a successful unarmed called shot)
     



      Holes
 in the limb make it expel small streams of subzero mist from your 
freezer which will freeze solid on impact when used in an unarmed 
attack. As long as your freezer isn’t extinguished, this makes unarmed 
called shots with this limb ice over the part of your target you hit. 
This ice will temporarily impede the use of extremities, making called 
shot effects to extremities (hands, feet, head) last longer.
     



      Effects of the called shot last an additional turn
     



      Effects of the called shot last two additional turns
     



      Effects of the called shot last three additional turns
     



      Effects of the called shot last four additional turns
     







      Hand-Launcher
     



      Prosthetic Hand Augment
     



      Activation Cost: 2 AP
     



      You
 are able to fire your hand at an opponent, dealing large amounts of 
damage, though you do not retain the body part if you fire it (at least 
until you go find it). The range of your hand is 50 feet.
     



      Damage class 3
     



      Damage class 4
     



      Damage class 5
     



      Damage class 6
     







      Neuromuscular Incapacitator
     



      Prosthetic Hand Augment
     



      Resist: Brute (marques down)
     



      An
 electrical current covering your body part disrupts voluntary muscular 
control of anyone you hit it with during an unarmed attack.
     



      Your target vibrates for a second, but is otherwise fine
     



      Your target is stunned for one action point
     



      Your target is stunned for one action point
     



      Your target is stunned for two action points
     







      Propellers
     



      Prosthetic Hand Augment
     



      Your
 prosthetic is built with propellers for moving across water, allowing 
your swim speed to increase based on its marque. Your swim speed is 
still hindered by your armor.
     



      +10 swim speed
     



      +15 swim speed
     



      +20 swim speed
     



      +25 swim speed
     







      Retractable
     



      Prosthetic Hand Augment
     



      Requires: Hand-Launcher augment applied to the hand
     



      You
 can have your hand tethered to a rope or chain that automatically 
returns to you after being fired. Though you do not have to do anything,
 it does take a little bit of time before the hand returns to you.
     



      Returns within 3 AP
     



      Returns within 2 AP
     



      Returns within 1 AP
     



      Returns immediately
     







      p Prosthetic Leg Augments M
     



      Extreme Speed
     



      Prosthetic Leg Augment
     



      The appendage is streamlined for speed, allowing the user to have greater overland velocity.
     



      +5 speed
     



      +5 speed
     



      +10 speed
     



      +15 speed
     







      Springs
     



      Prosthetic Leg Augment
     



      By melding high-tension springs into your graft, its user gains extra height whenever jumping or leaping.
     



      +5 feet jump height
     



      +10 feet jump height
     



      +15 feet jump height
     



      +20 feet jump height
     







      Propellers
     



      Prosthetic Leg Augment
     



      Your
 prosthetic is built with propellers for moving across water, allowing 
your swim speed to increase based on its marque. Your swim speed is 
still hindered by your armor.
     



      +10 swim speed
     



      +15 swim speed
     



      +20 swim speed
     



      +25 swim speed
     







      Automaton-Specific
     



      While
 all prosthetic augments can be applied to automatons, the following 
augments (which would augment an automaton’s head, torso, or groin) 
cannot be applied to living people. Thus, these are automaton-specific 
augments that you’ll need the Automaton Tinkerer specialty for.
     







      Automaton Head Augments M
     



      Sensory Transmission
     



      Automaton Head Augment
     



      The
 automaton can broadcast its senses to a single device (often held by 
the user) for 1 action point. The distance it can broadcast is 
determined by the marque of the augment.
     



      Up to 200 feet away
     



      Up to 2,000 feet away
     



      Up to 2 miles away
     



      Up to 20 miles away
     







      p Automaton Torso Augments M
     



      Back-Pack
     



      Automaton Torso Augment
     



      The
 automaton has the ability to latch onto an ally’s back, acting as the 
ally’s backpack. This leaves all of the automaton’s limbs free to act as
 normal while the ally carries the automaton around. The automaton 
cannot move while being carried. It takes 1 turn for the automaton to 
become a back-pack or unpack itself and move under its own power again.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     







      Mass Propulsion
     



      Automaton Torso Augment
     



      Using
 a propeller, steamjet, or some other such device attached to the 
torso’s back, your subject is able to increase their thrust while 
moving. While this cannot give you the ability to fly, it grants bonuses
 to both land and flight movement speeds.
     



      +5 feet per move
     



      +10 feet per move
     



      +15 feet per move
     



      +20 feet per move
     







      Poison Gas Epicenter
     



      Automaton Torso Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on the Torso
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP
     



      You
 can insert a single vial of alchemical gas into the automaton’s torso. 
Once you activate this augment, the gas starts taking effect. When you 
end your turn, the gas releases from the automaton’s torso, affecting 
those around the automaton. This allows the automaton to move the gas 
around the battlefield. The automaton serves as the center of the gas’s 
area of effect, although through clever crafting the automaton doesn’t 
have to worry about the gas spraying onto itself. The gas lasts as long 
as it normally would.
     



      The
 amount of action points required to refill the gas supply is based off 
of the marque of this augment. It costs two action points to eject a 
dose of gas before it has run out on its own. This will cause it to stay
 in the space the automaton is currently standing in and will no longer 
move with the automaton.
     



      3 AP to refill gas chamber
     



      3 AP to refill gas chamber
     



      2 AP to refill gas chamber
     



      1 AP to refill gas chamber
     







      Note: For the crafting of gases, see Alchemy.
     







      Poison Gas Receptor
     



      Automaton Torso Augment
     



      Requires: Torso with the Poison Gas Epicenter augment
     



      You’ve upgraded your gas dispenser to hold extra doses of alchemical gases. You still can only release one gas at a time.
     



      Maximum of Two Doses
     



      Maximum of Three Doses
     



      Maximum of Four Doses
     



      Maximum of Six Doses
     







      Sensor Array
     



      Automaton Torso Augment
     



      You’ve
 crafted a sensor array into your automaton’s torso. This allows you to 
place automaton head augments on the torso as well as the ability for 
the automaton to see and hear through its torso.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Automata.
     
















      Bio-Flux Skill
     



      Bio-flux
 is the craft of scientifically altering a creature’s basic physiology. 
Essence warping, genetic restructuring, and basic external flesh 
augmentations make up the bulk of this science. This is an often 
grueling and taboo process that has yet to become perfected and often 
leaves its subjects with unintentional side effects and scars.
     

      These can be as subtle as an unexpected change in eye color to as drastic as a reformed central nervous system.
     



      In
 its younger years this school of science birthed both the satyr race 
and the farishtaa-conversion process. It has revolutionized the medical 
fields, wiping out all birth-defects and genetic diseases from those 
able to afford it. Even at its most basic levels, bio-flux has the 
ability to fill a downtrodden gentleman with energy to keep him awake 
and ready for action regardless of how badly he had been knocked down.
     







      Reputation of Bio-Flux
     



      In
 addition to the sometimes monstrous consequences of augmenting 
someone’s genetic code, the process of bio-flux requires large amounts 
of essence to use as a pallet. Most bio-flux scientists harvest this raw
 essence from game and livestock animals, though it must be greatly 
refined multiple times and even then only yields a small amount of low 
quality essence.
     



      It
 was only after many less-than-reputable experimentations that it was 
discovered that sentient beings produce the purest essence available. 
These studies led to the widespread superstition that essence was more 
than primordial genetic material but a collection of personality and 
memories: a person’s soul. A disdain grew among the population against 
bio-flux, gaining its more fervent practitioners the nickname of Soul 
Merchants. Further outcry against the science came when the crown 
princess of Evangless went mad after being bio-revivified back to life. 
Unable to cope with scrambled memories and mental inconsistencies caused
 by the process, the princess’s mind became splintered, causing many 
government officials from around the world to ban bio-flux research. 
These days pure essence is a rare commodity that forces most, if not 
all, wishing to follow this forsaken art to turn to the darker corners 
of Rilausia to further their studies.
     











      p Invigoration Specialties M
     



      Bio-Invigoration
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      You’ve
 crafted a complex light device called a bio-invigorator. This can be 
worn on any called shot location to avoid having to hold it while it’s 
drawn. You can restore hit points during combat by treating your allies.
 If you use invigorate on an ally, you must be adjacent to them.
     



      You
 can treat yourself, but you can only heal half as many of your own hit 
points as you would if you were healing another person. You cannot use 
Bio-Invigoration to restore hit points to an automaton or other 
non-living being.
     



      restores 6 hit points (3 of your own)
     



      restores 12 hit points (6 of your own)
     



      restores 18 hit points (9 of your own)
     



      restores 24 hit points (12 of your own)
     







      Bio-Invigoration Expert
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      Requires: Bio-Invigoration specialty
     



      You optimize your bio-invigorator. When you use bio-invigoration, you now restore hit points based on this chart:
     



      restores 10 hit points (5 of your own)
     



      restores 20 hit points (10 of your own)
     



      restores 30 hit points (15 of your own)
     



      restores 40 hit points (20 of your own)
     







      Quickshot Bio-Invigoration
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      Requires: Bio-Invigoration specialty
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      Combat doesn’t wait for the slow bio-invigorator. You may now use bio-invigoration for only 2 action points.
     



      Medical Marvel
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      Requires: Bio-Invigoration specialty
     



      You
 can heal beyond a person’s maximum hit points. If you over-heal 
somebody, the excess hit points stays with them until the end of their 
turn (when their action points refresh). If their excess hit points are 
damaged, then that damage is simply negated.
     



      For
 example, you use bio-invigoration on a friend who has a maximum of 50 
hit points. He is over-healed, granting him 5 extra hit points. Before 
the end of his next turn, he is stabbed by an attack that deals 4 hit 
points, leaving him at 51. His turn ends, and his hit points are reduced
 to 50, effectively leaving him unharmed.
     







      Self-Administer
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      Requires: Bio-Invigoration specialty
     



      Though
 the bio-invigorator was originally difficult to use on yourself, you’ve
 outfitted it to work on yourself efficiently. When you use 
bio-invigoration on yourself, you heal just as much as you would restore
 of another’s hit points.
     







      Manipulate Essence
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      You
 have gained the knowledge and skill to manipulate a creature’s essence.
 Using a bit of pure base essence, you are able to modify genetics 
during downtime.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can maintain several people with essence 
manipulations based on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. You’ll 
learn 2 augments from this specialty, which can be selected under 
“essence augments” below. These augments have marques. At lower levels, 
you’ll start with Marque I augments. As your skill in Bio-Flux improves,
 your marques will increase. See the “Crafting” page at the beginning of
 this chapter for more information.
     



      Every
 person can be upgraded with 3 essence manipulations. Sometimes an 
augment will take up multiple augment slots. For example, the 
“regeneration” augment is worth 2 slots, so a person only has 1 more 
available slot for an augment after “regeneration” has been applied.
     



      You
 have the ability to remove essence augments off of people during 
downtime as well.
     







      Number of Augmented People you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy workshop space or essence, you can manipulate a few 
people without spending anything. These people must be constantly 
maintained by you and their essence reverts back to normal soon after 
leaving your care, thus losing all of their augments. You may manipulate
 and maintain a number of people based on your DIY score. You may 
manipulate or re-augment people during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Essence Manipulations z
     



      Essence
 is a volatile and often illegal substance. Bio-flux specialists are 
ostracized from their community and their manipulations only carried out
 in the black market. Because of that, the Trust (the world’s economic 
caretaker) does not regulate the cost of essence manipulations. 
Nonetheless, an essence manipulator will still need to pay for the 
materials of an essence manipulation they choose to do. They can, 
however, get away with charging whatever they’d like for the actual 
manipulation.
     



      If
 you need to manipulate essence that you can’t do for free from your DIY
 score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      Every
 augment increases the market price of the essence manipulation. The 
higher the marque, the greater the price. The market price for an 
augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are manipulating the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the
 same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price fo a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 10 princes.
     







      Beta Essence
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Bio-Flux & Manipulate Essence specialty
     



      You
 know your own essence well enough to safely twist it and strengthen it 
enough to add additional modification onto it. You may now act as though
 your essence have two additional slots.
     







      Prototype Essence
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Bio-Flux, Manipulate Essence, & Beta Essence specialties
     



      You
 are now able to manipulate other creatures as well as you manipulate 
yourself. You may now treat other creatures as though they had 2 
additional slots when manipulating their essence.
     







      Fast Manipulation
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      Requires: 6 skill points in Bio-Flux & Manipulate Essence specialty
     



      Resist: Spirit (negates)
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      You
 are able to use advanced tools in order to quickly manipulate essence 
on the battlefield. However, because of the haste of these 
manipulations, they only last until the subject’s next breather.
     



      If
 the subject so chooses, they may roll a Spirit resist against your 
bio-flux to negate the manipulation.
     







      Body Renewal
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      Requires: Manipulate Essence specialty
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      By
 applying just the right amount of essence to a wounded area, you are 
able to trigger a muscle memory that reverts the subject’s body back to 
an undamaged state. You may spend 3 action points to heal your subject 
of one wound point or one effect caused from them (broken bones, 
blinded, lost senses, et cetera).
     







      Gene Therapy
     



      Bio-Flux Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Bio-Flux, Manipulate Essence, & Body Renewal specialties
     



      You
 force a living subject’s body to painfully regrow a severed body part 
or critically injured body part. Once per downtime, you are able to 
remove a lasting Fatal Effect from your subject.
     











      p Essence Augments M
     



      Aerodynamize
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your body and features become sleek and slender with curved edges so the wind will always flow with your movements.
     



      +5 movement speed
     



      +10 movement speed
     



      +10 movement speed
     



      +15 movement speed
     







      Acidic Blood
     



      Essence Augment
     



      The
 blood within your veins is now dark and corrosive. This highlights your
 veins, making them dark and easily visible. When you receive bleeding 
damage from a melee attack, the person inflicting the damage suffers an 
equal amount of soakable damage from being sprayed by your blood as long
 as they are adjacent to you.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in bio-flux.
     







      Acidic Spit
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Your
 saliva has been changed to become tar-like and acidic. For 1 action 
point, you can make a ranged attack using your acidic saliva. This 
attack has a range of 10 feet and uses strike to determine damage.
     



      damage class 1
     



      damage class 2
     



      damage class 3
     



      damage class 4
     







      Amphibious
     



      Essence Augment
     



      You sprout gills and your lungs gain the ability to extract oxygen from water naturally. You can now breathe while underwater.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in bio-flux.
     







      Body of Flames
     



      Essence Augment
     



      The
 skin on your body is unnaturally warm to the touch, to the point that 
it slightly burns those who touch you. This causes your skin to have a 
slight red tinge and your hair to lighten.
     



      When being grabbed or grabbing, victims take 1 heat damage per turn
     



      When being grabbed or grabbing, victims take 2 heat damage per turn
     



      When being grabbed or grabbing, victims take 3 heat damage per turn
     



      When being grabbed or grabbing, victims take 4 heat damage per turn
     







      Chameleon
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Cost: 1 AP (see below)
     



      Much
 like the scales of a lizard, you are able to change both the color and 
texture of your skin and hair. For one action point you may undergo this
 change.
     



      +2 to Cunning rolls when hiding without clothing or disguising yourself
     



      +4 to Cunning rolls when hiding without clothing or disguising yourself
     



      +6 to Cunning rolls when hiding without clothing or disguising yourself
     



      +8 to Cunning rolls when hiding without clothing or disguising yourself
     







      Chloroplast
     



      Essence Augment
     



      You
 are able to survive with only a bit of sunlight and water due to large 
amounts of chloroplasts in your cells. Unfortunately it’s not easy being
 green, as your appearance becomes splotched with patches of green skin.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in bio-flux.
     



      Electric Flow
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Thin
 strains of static electricity flow across your body. When attacked by 
electricity, these strains help dissipate the electricity, allowing you 
to defend against electrical attacks as per normal.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost.
     







      Energize
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your
 body chemistry has been modified to grant you a seemingly endless 
supply of energy. Because of this you rarely feel tired and always shake
 when sitting still.
     



      +3 hit points
     



      +6 hit points
     



      +9 hit points
     



      +12 hit points
     







      Excess Adrenaline
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Takes up 3 Essence Slots on a Person
     



      Your
 body has been modified to produce and use twice the amount of 
adrenaline of a normal being. While this does speed you up temporarily, 
it exhausts you immediately afterwards. You are able to gain additional 
action points during a turn; however, you are stunned for an equal 
number of action points when your action points refresh. In other words,
 you’re stealing action points away from your next turn.
     



      You can gain 1 action point
     



      You can gain up to 2 action points
     



      You can gain up to 2 action points
     



      You can gain up to 3 action points
     







      Exoskeleton
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your
 bones thicken and elongate, some slightly jutting out of your body. 
This makes them harder to damage and even more difficult to break.
     



      +2 to Brute when resisting a called shot
     



      +4 to Brute when resisting a called shot
     



      +6 to Brute when resisting a called shot
     



      +8 to Brute when resisting a called shot
     







      Flame Retardant
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your
 skin becomes a darkened charcoal color that is less likely to ignite or
 burn. You are never denied your defense roll when on fire. You also 
gain extra soak against damage from being on fire and any other damage 
from fire.
     



      You gain a +2 soak against fire
     



      You gain a +3 soak against fire
     



      You gain a +4 soak against fire
     



      You gain a +5 soak against fire
     







      Flaming Breath
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Cost: 2 AP
     



      You’ve
 grown an extra gland in your throat that allows you to expel flames 
from your mouth. For 2 action points, you may make a ranged attack using
 your fiery saliva. This attack has a range of 10 feet, and uses strike 
to determine damage.
     



      damage class 3
     



      damage class 4
     



      damage class 5
     



      damage class 6
     







      Genetic Stability
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your
 essence has been solidified to a point that bio-fluxing your essence is
 a gruelling, painful ordeal. This  augment negates any cosmetic 
changes caused by other augments your essence has.
     



      +4 when resisting a Bio-Zapper
     



      +8 when resisting a Bio-Zapper
     



      +12 when resisting a Bio-Zapper
     



      +16 when resisting a Bio-Zapper
     







      Iron Lung
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your
 lungs have adapted to filter anything you breathe in, allowing you to 
breathe normally even when surrounded by noxious gases.
     



      +4 to Brute when resisting anything you inhale
     



      +8 to Brute when resisting anything you inhale
     



      +12 to Brute when resisting anything you inhale
     



      +16 to Brute when resisting anything you inhale
     







      Jellyskin
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your
 skin is exceptionally flexible and holds shape when you move it, 
allowing you to change the structure of your face more easily. Any time 
you are attempting to disguise yourself, you may gain a bonus to your 
roll. However, when you are nudged, punched, or attacked, your face 
retains dents until you can fix your appearance.
     



      +3
     



      +5
     



      +7
     



      +9
     







      Lead Blood
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your
 blood is made of molten metal, solidifying into small pellets after 
leaving your body. Drops of your blood can thus be used as crude 
ammunition for firearms. It causes you no damage and costs no action 
points to bleed out bullets, although your firearm must still be readied
 with them.
     



      -3 Accuracy when used as ammo
     



      -2 Accuracy when used as ammo
     



      -1 Accuracy when used as ammo
     



      No accuracy penalty when used as ammo
     







      Limitless Memory
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Small
 flashing lights coming from the inside of your head skitter across your
 crown, a visible sign of the massive amount of information processing 
going on inside the left side of your brain.
     



      +3 to the Sciences attribute
     



      +6 to the Sciences attribute
     



      +9 to the Sciences attribute
     



      +12 to the Sciences attribute
     







      Luminescent
     



      Essence Augment
     



      You cause your essence to radiate light, making your entire body glow. This light extends only so far.
     



      It lights the area adjacent to you
     



      It lights up the area 10 feet around you
     



      It lights up the area 15 feet around you
     



      It lights up the area 20 feet around you
     







      Marathon Body
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your body has been enriched to take a beating. This change has made you thick and stocky.
     



      Your maximum number of wounds is increased by 1
     



      Your maximum number of wounds is increased by 2
     



      Your maximum number of wounds is increased by 3
     



      Your maximum number of wounds is increased by 4
     







      Metal Exoskeleton
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Requires: Exoskeleton augment
     



      Your
 exoskeleton is made of natural metal armoring, weighing you down but 
acting as a natural kind of armor. You may act as if you were wearing 
any kind of armor on your body permanently, so if you armor is broken or
 destroyed, you still act as if you are wearing armor.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in bio-flux.
     







      Needles
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Cost: same as a Light Throwing Weapon attack (generally 2 AP)
     



      Small
 porcupine needles quickly grow out of your body. You can throw some of 
your needles at a single target with a damage class of 3 without the 
need to be drawn.
     



      10 feet of range
     



      15 feet of range
     



      20 feet of range
     



      25 feet of range
     







      Nobotic
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Resist: Cunning (see below)
     



      Your
 body appears to be made out of metal, making you appear to be some kind
 of robot when you aren’t. You gain a bonus to Cunning against anyone 
using Notice on you when you’re trying to hide the fact that you’re an 
organic being.
     



      +5, your body appears to be metallic
     



      +10, your metal body is angular and disproportionate
     



      +15, your metal body appears to be made of separate parts bolted together
     



      +20,
 your metal body looks machine-made with soulless eyes, emitting clear 
water vapor instead of sweat
     







      Osmote
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Requires: Jellyskin augment
     



      Your
 body is capable of actually absorbing the body of an opponent. When you
 successfully grapple or grab an opponent, your skin sinks through their
 armor and they automatically begin to take unsoakable damage. Your body
 is partially transparent and your solid organs bend like rubber. When 
you absorb organic material, it counts as eating.
     



      2 unsoakable damage per turn
     



      3 unsoakable damage per turn
     



      4 unsoakable damage per turn
     



      5 unsoakable damage per turn
     







      Overflow
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your
 skin tone, regardless of its color, takes on a more vibrant, healthy 
shade than it previously had. You find it increasingly easy to focus and
 feel more in tune with yourself.
     



      +2 on all Spirit resists
     



      +4 on all Spirit resists
     



      +6 on all Spirit resists
     



      +8 on all Spirit resists
     







      Performance Enhancer
     



      Essence Augment
     



      You instantly swell with muscles all over your body, feeling stronger than usual.
     



      +1 Brute
     



      +2 Brute
     



      +3 Brute
     



      +4 Brute
     







      Regeneration
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Essence Slots on a Person
     



      Your
 body has been modified to heal at a much faster rate than normal. The 
areas where you’ve taken wounds damage now have yellow skin blemishes. 
Along with this accelerated wound recovery, lingering wound effects are 
removed twice as fast.
     



      You recover 1 additional wound per day
     



      You recover 2 additional wounds per day
     



      You recover 3 additional wounds per day
     



      You recover 4 additional wounds per day
     







      Scaleskin
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Essence Slots on a Person
     



      Your
 skin mutates into thick scales, the outer layer of your grafts taking 
on a bumpy texture. This gives you a small amount of natural armoring.
     



      +1 soak class
     



      +2 soak class
     



      +3 soak class
     



      +4 soak class
     







      Scoped Vision
     



      Essence Augment
     



      This
 modification manipulates your browline, making it more narrow and 
focused. Your vision is radically enhanced granting, you the ability to 
see things others often overlook.
     



      +4 to Notice
     



      +8 to Notice
     



      +12 to Notice
     



      +16 to Notice
     







      Semi-Transparent Skin
     



      Essence Augment
     



      While
 making your skin partially see-through to reveal the inner workings of 
your body is horrifying to most, this serves as a useful tool for 
doctors trying to figure out what ails their patient. When being 
diagnosed, the person performing the diagnosis gains a bonus on their 
roll.
     



      +4 to being diagnosed
     



      +8 to being diagnosed
     



      +12 to being diagnosed
     



      +16 to being diagnosed
     







      Sixth Sense
     



      Essence Augment
     



      The
 frontal lobe of your brain has been enlarged, giving you the ability to
 sense impending danger. This change in your brain chemistry causes you 
to have frequent headaches.
     



      +2 priority
     



      +4 priority
     



      +6 priority
     



      +8 priority
     







      Sleepless
     



      Essence Augment
     



      You
 no longer have a need to sleep, although you still must rest to recover
 from fatigue and regain hit points during breathers. Thick ringlets 
form around your eyes.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in bio-flux.
     







      Slimy
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your sweat glands naturally secrete a thin layer of grease, making it easier to slip out of grabs.
     



      +4 to Dexterity when trying to break a grab
     



      +8 to Dexterity when trying to break a grab
     



      +12 to Dexterity when trying to break a grab
     



      +16 to Dexterity when trying to break a grab
     







      Stonebones
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Your
 bones have been augmented to be as hard as steel. Your bones may not be
 severed or broken. If you receive a fatal effect which would normally 
remove a limb, your limb stays attached. However you still suffer all 
other negative effects of the fatal effect. This makes your bones 
thicker and heavier, reducing your movement speed.
     



      -10 feet of movement speed
     



      -10 feet of movement speed
     



      -5 feet of movement speed
     



      movement speed is unaffected
     







      Vile Fumes
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      Your
 body expels an odor that causes those around you to become nauseated. 
For 3 action points, you may intensify these gases, forcing all those 
adjacent to you to make a Brute resist or become disoriented for a turn.
     



      tier 2 Brute resist
     



      tier 3 Brute resist
     



      tier 3 Brute resist
     



      tier 4 Brute resist
     







      Wall-Crawler
     



      Essence Augment
     



      Much
 like a gecko, your hands and feet are covered in small indentures that 
aid in climbing. You may climb on any ceiling or wall in any direction 
as per your normal movement speed.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque III for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in bio-flux.
     







      Crafting Bio-Zappers
     







      For
 years bio-flux scientists experimented, attempting to find a way to 
affect somebody’s essence in a matter of seconds rather than spending 
hours in surgery. Eventually, bio-zappers came about: a device that 
vaguely resembles a gun, but blasts out a ray that instantly morphs the 
target’s essence. The change doesn’t last very long, but, in a battle, 
it definitely gets the job done.
     



      A
 normal bio-zapper comes as a heavy weapon that looks like an advanced 
firearm. You point it at somebody within 25 feet and pull the trigger 
(just like a ranged attack costing 2 action points). You roll your 
accuracy and they roll their evade. If you meet or exceed their evade, 
you hit them with the bio-zapper.
     



      You
 choose the setting on your bio-zapper. (Without a setting, the 
bio-zapper does nothing). The effect will last until the target’s next 
breather. You can change the setting on your bio-zapper in order to gain
 different effects. Switching between settings costs 1 action point. If 
you hit somebody with a new bio-zapper setting, the new effect replaces 
the old one.
     







      Bio-Zapper Developer
      
      Bio-Flux Specialty
      
      You can now create the battle-ready, essence-manipulating bio-zapper and use it in battle.
      
      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several bio-zappers 
based on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These bio-zappers can 
then be upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this 
specialty, which can be selected under “bio-zapper augments” below. 
These augments have marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I
 augments. As your skill in Bio-Flux improves, your marques will 
increase. See the “Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for 
more information.
      
      Each
 bio-zapper can be upgraded with 3 augments. Some materials can only be 
upgraded twice (like wooden bio-zappers) or just once (like organic 
bio-zappers). Sometimes an augment will take up multiple augment slots. 
If an augment is worth 2 slots, a metal bio-zapper only has 1 more 
available slot for an augment after the 2-slot augment has been applied.
      
      Bio-zapper
 augments come in two varieties: those that augment the bio-zapper (like
 normal) and bio-zapper settings. Only one setting can be active at a 
time, and switching between settings costs 1 action point.
     




      Number of Bio-Zappers you can Maintain  z
      
      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can develop some bio-zappers 
entirely out of scraps. These bio-zappers must be constantly maintained 
by you and stop working soon after leaving your care. You may build and 
maintain a number of bio-zappers based on your DIY score. You may build 
new bio-zappers or augment old ones during any period of downtime you 
have.
      

      The Cost of Bio-Zappers z
      
      If you need to build a bio-zapper that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
      
      Every
 augment increases the market price of the bio-zapper. The higher the 
marque, the greater the price. The market price for an augment can be 
found in the chart below.
      

      If you are building the augment, you 
pay 1/5th the price, which is the same as if you were buying an augment 
one marque lower. (As in, the material cost for a Marque III augment is 
the market price fo a Marque II augment.) The material cost for a Marque
 1 augment is 8 princes.
     




      Beta Bio-Zappers
      
      Bio-Flux Specialty
      
      Requires: 4 skill points in Bio-Flux & Bio-Zapper Developer specialty
      
      Your
 bio-zappers are complex pieces of machinery, but they can do some crazy
 things compared to most bio-zappers. Such bio-zappers can be upgraded 
with 2 more augments (bringing the total for metal bio-zappers up to 5 
augmentable slots).
      
      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta bio-zappers, 
they must succeed in rolling a sciences result one tier higher than the 
highest marque you have on your bio-zapper. If your bio-zapper has a 
Marque IV augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can 
somehow obtain a tier result of 5 with their sciences attribute).
      

      Prototype Bio-Zappers
      
      Bio-Flux Specialty
      
      Requires: 16 skill points in Bio-Flux, Bio-Zapper Developer, & Beta Bio-Zappers specialties
      
      You’ve
 perfected your beta bio-zappers and made them user-friendly. Now 
anybody can use a bio-zapper that you designate as being a prototype.
     




      Concentrated Stream
      
      Bio-Flux Specialty
      
      Cost: Bio-Zapper Attack to initiate and 1 AP to continue in subsequent turns
      
      You
 lock your weapon onto your target, pull the trigger, and don’t let go. 
After successfully hitting a target with a bio-zapper, all subsequent 
attacks with that bio-zapper automatically hit. You must spend one 
action point each turn to continue your ray. If at any point you do not 
have a clear line of site to your target or either of you moves out of 
the range of the bio-zapper, this effect is broken.
     




      Extra Settings
      
      Bio-Flux Specialty
      
      Your
 bio-zappers are designed to hold extra settings, effectively giving you
 extra augment slots to place bio-zapper settings into.
      
      This
 specialty works within the marque system. The amount of interchangeable
 slots the bio-zapper has depends on the marque of its developer. Each 
extra augment slot increases the price, just like normal, but only a 
person with this specialty can access the extra settings.
      
      1 extra augment slot of a setting
      
      2 extra augment slots of a setting
      
      3 extra augment slots of a setting
      
      4 extra augment slots of a setting
      

      Multi-Ray
      
      Bio-Flux Specialty
      
      Cost: Bio-Zapper Attack +1 AP
      
      By
 double tapping your trigger finger, you are able to quickly launch off 
two rays. These rays may be launched at different targets.
     




      Splicer
      
      Bio-Flux Specialty
      
      Your
 bio-zapper settings don’t replace each other; now, they overlap! When 
you hit an opponent with two different settings, they both affect the 
target until the target’s next breather. (If you hit the same target 
with the same setting twice, there’s no effect.)
     




      Tracing
      
      Bio-Flux Specialty
      
      Cost: Bio-Zapper Attack +1 AP
      
      You
 hold down the button on your bio-zapper, sending a ray arching across 
the battlefield. Then you move your bio-zapper’s ray until you hit the 
target, radically increasing its accuracy and your chances of your 
hitting your target.
      
      +4 accuracy
      
      +8 accuracy
      
      +12 accuracy
      
      +16 accuracy
      

      p Bio-Zapper Augments M
      
      Accurate
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment
      
      Fine attention has been placed on the quality of your bio-zapper. You gain a bonus to accuracy with the bio-zapper.
      
      +1
      
      +2
      
      +3
      
      +4
      

      Armor-Encumbering
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Dexterity (marques down)
      
      Your
 bio-zapper makes your target’s body react as if the clothing on it is 
much heavier than it actually is. The penalty is greater depending on 
how much armor the target is wearing.
      
      -5 speed penalty (heavy or larger armor)
      
      -10
 speed penalty (heavy or larger armor) or -5 speed penalty (light or 
medium armor)
      
      -15 
speed penalty (heavy or larger armor) or -10 speed penalty (light or 
medium armor)
      
      -20 
speed penalty (heavy or larger armor) or -15 speed penalty (light or 
medium armor)
      

      Blood Thinning
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      The victim’s blood refuses to clot when bleeding.
      
      Patching Bleeding now only stops 3 bleeding damage
      
      Patching Bleeding now only stops 2 bleeding damage
      
      Patching Bleeding now only stops 1 bleeding damage
      
      Bleeding can only be stopped when taking a breather
      

      Bone Spurring
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Spirit (marques down)
      
      The victim’s bones become spiked inside of their bodies. This causes extreme pain when the victim does anything.
      
      The victim takes 1 unsoakable damage for each action point they spend
      
      The victim takes 1 unsoakable damage for each action point they spend
      
      The victim takes 2 unsoakable damage for each action point they spend
      
      The victim takes 2 unsoakable damage for each action point they spend
      

      Collapsible
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment
      
      Sometimes
 discretion is the better part of not having your bio-zapper 
confiscated, so you create a clever collapsing mechanism for your 
bio-zapper which makes it easier to conceal. Any bio-zapper this is 
applied to can be broken down for 3 action points and reassembled for 3 
action points. It is treated, for purposes of concealment, as being 
smaller than it is, but only when broken down.
      
      1 category smaller
      
      2 categories smaller
      
      3 categories smaller
      
      4 categories smaller
      

      Crippling
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      When hit by a crippling ray, your body becomes weak and sickly.
      
      -3 on Brute rolls
      
      -6 on Brute rolls
      
      -9 on Brute rolls
      
      -12 on Brute rolls
      

      Custom
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment
      
      This
 bio-zapper was designed to be used by one person and one person only. 
That person must be designated at the time of the bio-zapper’s crafting.
 If anybody else attempts to use the custom bio-zapper, they suffer a 
penalty on all accuracy rolls with it.
      
      -3
      
      -6
      
      -9
      
      -12
      

      Deflecting
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment
      
      You
 may use this bio-zapper like a shield, allowing you to deflect incoming
 attacks (gaining a +4 to evade in exchange for 1 reflexive action 
point).
      
      Note: This 
augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining cost, 
though you can learn this augment despite your skill in bio-flux.
     




      Debilitating
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      Your target has sporadic spells of exhaustion, conveniently taking place right as they try to attack.
      
      -2 on strike rolls
      
      -4 on strike rolls
      
      -6 on strike rolls
      
      -8 on strike rolls
      

      Demoralizing
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Cunning (marques down)
      
      Bio-Zappers on this setting rewrite its victim’s face to resemble a Cubist painting, making them feel less confident and ugly.
      
      -2 on Spirit rolls
      
      -4 on Spirit rolls
      
      -6 on Spirit rolls
      
      -8 on Spirit rolls
      

      Discombobulating
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Spirit (negates, see below)
      
      Victims
 hit with rays on this setting have their organs rearranged in such a 
weird way that it becomes impossible for them to recover from wounds 
damage (but not wounds effects) while under its effects.
      
      tier 2 Spirit resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Spirit resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Spirit resist to negate
      
      tier 4 Spirit resist to negate
      

      Essence Draining
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Spirit (marques down)
      
      Victims
 hit by this ray see their essence slots temporarily shut down. This not
 only makes augments to those slots useless but also causes the person 
to become grotesque like an elf. The person wielding the bio-zapper 
chooses which, if any, augments on the target are deactivated.
      
      1 essence slot is turned off
      
      2 essence slots are turned off
      
      3 essence slots are turned off
      
      4 essence slots are turned off
      

      Exhausting
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Spirit (marques down)
      
      Hitting
 a victim with a ray on the exhausting setting tires the opponent. A 
quick blast from one of these ensures the victim will not be going the 
distance.
      
      maximum hit points are lowered by 5
      
      maximum hit points are lowered by 10
      
      maximum hit points are lowered by 15
      
      maximum hit points are lowered by 20
      

      Extended Range
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment
      
      Your bio-zapper can hit targets well past 25 feet.
      
      targets up to 50 feet away
      
      targets up to 75 feet away
      
      targets up to 100 feet away
      
      targets up to 150 feet away
      

      Eyelid-Fusing
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (negates, see below)
      
      Victims
 unlucky enough to be in the path of a blinding ray find their eyelids 
fused together, making it impossible for them the see anything without 
drastic actions. For a single action point they can deal a point of 
wounds damage to themselves to rip their eyes open. They don’t take a 
wounds effect for doing so.
      
      tier 2 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 4 Brute resist to negate
      

      Flesh Melting
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      Flesh
 melting rays cause the victim’s skin to melt and tear, making all 
attacks against them more deadly. This cannot lower their soak class 
below zero.
      
      soak class lowered by 1
      
      soak class lowered by 2
      
      soak class lowered by 3
      
      soak class lowered by 4
      

      Growing
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      This
 ray causes the victim to grow just large enough for their armor and 
clothing to become unbearably tight and uncomfortable. This ray only 
affects victims in armor.
      
      -2 on defense rolls
      
      -4 on defense rolls
      
      -6 on defense rolls
      
      -8 on defense rolls
      

      Hesitating
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Spirit (marques down)
      
      When
 hit with this ray, its victim is dropped on the priority list as they 
hesitate to act, allowing others to take their turn first. If it drops 
them to the bottom of the priority list, they act there. They must wait 
until everyone has taken their turn before going.
      
      Dropped 1 priority slot
      
      Dropped 2 priority slots
      
      Dropped 3 priority slots
      
      Dropped 4 priority slots
      

      Hexing
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Spirit (negates, see below)
      
      This
 ray alters your victim’s body chemistry, causing them to feel drained 
and demoralized. It forces them to see their own limits. When affected 
by this ray, victims may no longer re-roll pure 12s.
      
      tier 2 Spirit resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Spirit resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Spirit resist to negate
      
      tier 4 Spirit resist to negate
      


      Hindering
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      The victim’s equilibrium is thrown off, making acrobatics and fast movements almost impossible.
      
      -2 on Dexterity rolls
      
      -4 on Dexterity rolls
      
      -6 on Dexterity rolls
      
      -8 on Dexterity rolls
      

      Intensity
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment
      
      You have increased your victim’s dosage and in doing so made the blast more difficult to resist.
      
      The target gets a -2 to resist the ray’s effects
      
      The target gets a -4 to resist the ray’s effects
      
      The target gets a -6 to resist the ray’s effects
      
      The target gets a -8 to resist the ray’s effects
      

      Micro-Zapper
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment
      
      You have made your bio-zapper significantly smaller, letting you wield it as a smaller weapon.
      
      wields as a medium weapon
      
      wields as a medium weapon
      
      wields as a light weapon
      
      wields as a light weapon
      

      Muffling
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (negates, see below)
      
      The
 victim’s ears melt and fuse with the side of their head causing them to
 become deafened. For a single action point they can deal a point of 
wounds damage to themselves to rip their ears open. They don’t take a 
wounds effect for doing so.
      
      tier 2 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 4 Brute resist to negate
      




      Multi-Setting
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment
      
      This
 augment allows the bio-zapper to be in two settings at once. This 
allows you to choose between multiple settings to fire without spending 1
 action point to switch between them. You still can only fire from one 
setting at a time.
      
      The zapper may be in 2 settings
      
      The zapper may be in 3 settings
      
      The zapper may be in 4 settings
      
      The zapper may be in 5 settings
      

      Nail Growing
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Dexterity (marques down)
      
      The victim’s fingers swell, making it difficult for them to smoothly pull the trigger on a firearm.
      
      -2 accuracy with a firearm or crossbow
      
      -4 accuracy with a firearm or crossbow
      
      -6 accuracy with a firearm or crossbow
      
      -8 accuracy with a firearm or crossbow
      

      Nausea-Inducing
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (negates, see below)
      
      Your
 bio-zapper shakes and rattles your target’s stomach, making them 
unsettled and nauseated (-2 to all rolls until 3 action points are spent
 emptying their stomach).
      
      tier 2 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 4 Brute resist to negate
      

      Perspiring
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      Victims
 hit by a bio-zapper set to perspiring will begin to rapidly sweat. 
Their sweaty hands make it very difficult to hold on to any items and 
even more difficult to hold on to a person.
      
      -2 to all disarm resists and maintaining grabs
      
      -4 to all disarm resists and maintaining grabs
      
      -6 to all disarm resists and maintaining grabs
      
      -8 to all disarm resists and maintaining grabs
      

      Rattling
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      After
 being hit by a ray on this setting, the victim’s legs become weak like 
jelly. Because of this, all called shots to to the legs become much more
 effective.
      
      -2 on resist rolls against the legs
      
      -4 on resist rolls against the legs
      
      -6 on resist rolls against the legs
      
      -8 on resist rolls against the legs
      

      Reinforced
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment
      
      You
 build your bio-zapper solidly, giving it little room to break on the 
battlefield. Whenever somebody attempts to sunder the reinforced 
bio-zapper, it acts as if it is several size categories larger than it 
is. Once these “reinforced” size categories are gone, then it will 
actually break.
      
      1 reinforced size category
      
      2 reinforced size categories
      
      3 reinforced size categories
      
      4 reinforced size categories
      

      Skin-Papering
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      Your bio-zapper makes your target’s skin become thinner, less moist, and burn easier.
      
      -4 on resists against burns
      
      -8 on resists against burns
      
      -12 on resists against burns
      
      -16 on resists against burns
      

      Skin-Inflaming
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      Your bio-zapper makes your target’s skin secrete a flammable liquid. They have a harder time resisting catching on fire.
      
      -3 on resists against catching on fire
      
      -6 on resists against catching on fire
      
      -9 on resists against catching on fire
      
      -12 on resists against catching on fire
      

      Silencing
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (negates, see below)
      
      Victims
 hit by this ray find their mouths sewn shut, their ability to speak or 
make any sound stripped from them. In addition, victims lose the ability
 to use any specialties with required vocal components, such as yelling 
or singing. For a single action point they can deal a point of wounds 
damage to themselves to rip their lips open. They don’t take a wounds 
effect for doing so.
      
      tier 2 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 3 Brute resist to negate
      
      tier 4 Brute resist to negate
      

      Silent
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment
      
      This
 bio-zapper is whispering death. It makes almost no sound when fired, 
making it almost impossible for people to figure out where it is by 
sound alone. Any time anybody is attempting to figure out where the 
bio-zapper was shot from based on sound they must make a tier result 
with their Cunning.
      
      tier 2 Cunning to hear
      
      tier 3 Cunning to hear
      
      tier 4 Cunning to hear
      
      impossible (unless they can get a tier 5 Cunning)
      

      Sluggish
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      Your bio-zapper makes your target’s legs mutate to resemble elephant feet, slowing them down.
      
      speed reduced by 5 feet
      
      speed reduced by 10 feet
      
      speed reduced by 15 feet
      
      speed reduced by 20 feet
      

      Stupifying
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Cunning (marques down)
      
      The stupifying setting causes victims to become dazed and unobservant. They take a penalty on Cunning rolls.
      
      -3 on Cunning rolls
      
      -6 on Cunning rolls
      
      -9 on Cunning rolls
      
      -12 on Cunning rolls
      

      Swelling
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      This
 setting creates rays that cause the victim’s called shot locations to 
swell to ridiculous sizes. These swollen called shot are then easier to 
hit due to their increased size. You must select a single called shot 
location to affect when firing your bio-zapper set to this setting.
      
      +2 accuracy to that called shot
      
      +4 accuracy to that called shot
      
      +6 accuracy to that called shot
      
      +8 accuracy to that called shot
      

      Weakening
      
      Bio-Zapper Augment (setting)
      
      Resist: Brute (marques down)
      
      The
 rays fired from this zapper make it difficult for your victim to lift 
their weapon, much less harm you with it. The damage class on any melee 
attacks the target makes is lowered.
      
      melee damage class lowered by 1
      
      melee damage class lowered by 2
      
      melee damage class lowered by 3
      
      melee damage class lowered by 4
      









      Engineer Skill
     



      Engineering
 is the creation of vehicles. Engineering is one of the most inclusive 
skills, for it involves the creation of everything from flyers to blimps
 to trains to sailing vessels. With Engineering, you could create 
walking land machines, a comfortable carriage with a cannon mounted on 
top, or a graviton sphere-powered flyer that spews poisonous gas and can
 comfortably carry your entire party of stalwart adventures. A couple 
points in Engineering and soon the world is just a speck below you.
     











      Maintenance
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
      
      Requires: 2 skill points in Engineer
      
      Patch
 up a few bullet holes here, change the pressure valves over there - the
 job of a mechanic is never done. While in this stance, you make a 
series of constant small repairs to the section of the ship you’re in. 
This repairs 1 vehicle wound for every 2 points you have in Engineering 
at the end of your turn (when your action points refresh).
     




      Power Surge
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Cost: 1 AP
      
      When
 you’re not the pilot, you may tweak the coolant to grant the vehicle 
greater movement without overheating. This grants the pilot an 
additional action point in order to move or steer the vehicle once more 
for the turn.
     




      Quick Upgrades
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      You
 may switch the parts on a vehicle quickly without waiting for downtime.
 You must know the augment you are about to put onto the part. You 
choose which slot(s) to empty and which slot(s) to replace. For every 
slot that you change, you roll your Engineer skill to determine how 
quickly you do so. You must be adjacent to the vehicle in order to 
change its parts.
      
      If
 changing out the parts requires more action points than you have for 
the turn, you may do so over multiple, non-consecutive turns. For 
example, if it requires 7 action points to change out an augment, you 
could spend 3 action points this turn, and then wait a couple turns 
before spending the final 4 action points to switch out the augment. 
However, once you begin changing out parts, the original augment ceases 
to function and the new augment does not function until it is completely
 installed.
      
      10 AP
      
      7 AP
      
      4 AP
      
      2 AP
      

      Vehicle Repairs
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Requires: either Auto-Wright or Manual-Wright specialty
      
      Cost: 3 AP
      
      You
 are capable of repairing any vehicle that you are capable of building. 
You must be either inside or adjacent to the vehicle in order to make 
these repairs.
      
      10 vehicle wounds
      
      20 vehicle wounds
      
      30 vehicle wounds
      
      40 vehicle wounds
      


      p Grease Monkey Specialties M
      
      Gearhead
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
      
      Requires: 2 skill points in Engineering
      
      By
 constantly regulating steam intake and graviton rotations, you’re able 
to push a vehicle’s engine to its limits. When in this stance and either
 inside or adjacent to a vehicle, the vehicle’s speed increases by 5 
feet per 2 skill points you have in Engineering. Moving away from the 
vehicle breaks this stance.
      
      Gearjunkie
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Requires: 5 skill points in Engineer & Gearhead specialty
      
      When
 you’re working on a vehicle, efficiency is maximized. While in Gearhead
 stance, you may also grant a vehicle a +1 on evade rolls for every 5 
points you have in Engineer.
      

      Auto-Wright
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Automatically
 propelled vehicles are ideal at getting adventurers from point A to 
point B. You’ll be able to craft everything from jetpacks to gyrocycles,
 ironbirds, motorcars, powerboats, and more. You can now craft 
one-person automatically propelled vehicles (called autos for short).
      
      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several autos based on 
your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. They can then be upgraded with 
augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, which can be 
selected under “auto augments” below. These augments have marques. At 
lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. See the “Crafting” 
page at the beginning of this chapter for more information.
      
      Each
 auto can be upgraded with 3 augments. Some materials can only be 
upgraded twice (like wooden autos) or just once (like organic ones). 
Sometimes an augment will take up multiple augment slots. If an augment 
is worth 2 slots, an auto only has 1 more available slot for an augment 
after the 2-slot augment has been applied.
     




      Number of Autos you can Maintain  z
      
      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some autos entirely out 
of scraps. These vehicles must be constantly maintained by you and stop 
working soon after leaving your care. You may build and maintain a 
number of autos for free based on your DIY score. You may build new 
autos or augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
      

      The Cost of Autos z
      
      If
 you need to build an auto that you can’t build for free from your DIY 
score, you will need to buy the materials for it. An auto will have a 
base materials cost. It is 1/5th the market price.
      
      The
 automatic vehicle, unaugmented, will have a base cost depending on its 
marque. (The marque will determine its maximum speed per turn.) If you 
buy a vehicle and augments, you will add the price of the augments onto 
the price of the vehicle.
      



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
      

      If
 you are building the augment outside of your DIY Score, you pay 1/5th 
the price, which is the same as if you were buying an augment one marque
 lower. (As in, the material cost for a Marque III augment is the market
 price for a Marque II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 
augment is 14 princes.
     




      Beta Autos
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Requires: 4 skill points in Engineer & Auto-Wright specialty
      
      Your
 automatic vehicles are exceptionally advanced but quite difficult to 
use. Such autos can be upgraded with 2 more augments (bringing the total
 for metal autos up to 5 augmentable slots).
      
      If
 anybody other than you attempts to operate one of your autos, they must
 succeed in rolling a science result one tier higher than the highest 
level marque you have on your auto. If your auto has a Marque IV 
augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can somehow 
obtain a tier result of 5 with their science attribute).
      
      If
 you are a passenger in a beta auto that you created, you can allow 
another person to pilot the vehicle.
     




      Prototype Autos
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Requires: 16 skill points in Engineer, Auto-Wright, & Beta Autos specialties
      
      You’ve
 perfected your beta autos and made them user-friendly. Now anybody can 
pilot your automatic vehicle as long as you designate it as being a 
prototype.
      

      Manual-Wright
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Manual 
vehicles are complex, powerful vehicles that move under the pilot’s 
power. You’ll be able to build walkers, steamtanks, ornithopters, 
motorships, and everything in-between. You can now craft one-person 
manual vehicles, called clankers for short.
      
      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several clankers based 
on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. They can then be upgraded 
with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, which can be
 selected under “clanker augments” below. These augments have marques. 
At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. See the “Crafting”
 page at the beginning of this chapter for more information.
      
      Each
 clanker can be upgraded with 3 augments. Some materials can only be 
upgraded twice (like wooden clankers) or just once (like organic ones). 
Sometimes an augment will take up multiple augment slots. For example, 
the “flying” augment is worth 2 slots, so a clanker only has 1 more 
available slot for an augment after “flying” has been applied.
     




      Number of Clankers you can Maintain  z
      
      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some clankers entirely 
out of scraps. These vehicles must be constantly maintained by you and 
stop working soon after leaving your care. You may build and maintain a 
number of clankers for free based on your DIY score. You may build new 
clankers or augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
      

      The Cost of Clankers z
      
      If
 you need to build a clanker that you can’t build for free from your DIY
 score, you will need to buy the materials for it. A clanker will have a
 base materials cost. It is 1/5th the market price.
      
      The
 manual vehicle, unaugmented, will have a base cost depending on its 
marque. (The marque will determine its maximum speed per action point 
spent.) If you buy a vehicle and augments, you will add the price of the
 augments onto the price of the vehicle.
      

      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
      

      If
 you are building the augment outside of your DIY Score, you pay 1/5th 
the price, which is the same as if you were buying an augment one marque
 lower. (As in, the material cost for a Marque III augment is the market
 price for a Marque II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 
augment is 12 princes.
     




      Beta Clankers
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Requires: 4 skill points in Engineer & Manual-Wright specialty
      
      Your
 manual vehicles are exceptionally advanced but quite difficult to use. 
Such clankers can be upgraded with 2 more augments (bringing the total 
for metal clankers up to 5 augmentable slots).
      
      If
 anybody other than you attempts to operate one of your clankers, they 
must succeed in rolling a science result one tier higher than the 
highest level marque you have on your vehicle. If your clanker has a 
Marque IV augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can 
somehow obtain a tier result of 5 with their Sciences attribute).
      
      If
 you are a passenger in a beta clanker that you created, you can allow 
another person to pilot the vehicle.
      

      Prototype Clankers
      
      Engineer Specialty
      
      Requires: 16 skill points in Engineer, Manual-Wright, & Beta Clankers specialties
      
      You’ve
 perfected your beta clankers and made them user-friendly. Now anybody 
can pilot your manual vehicle as long as you designate it as being a 
prototype.
     




      p Auto & Clanker Augments M
      
      Aerial Propulsion
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Can only be applied to Autos
      
      Your
 vehicle has jets, wings, propellers, sails, or some other way of moving
 through the air. You may apply your vehicle speed to moving in the air.
 You do not gain the ability to move vertically in the air - you can 
only move horizontally. Aerial propulsion also allows you to move 
through water, but you move at half your speed (unless you have 
Underwater Propulsion).
      
      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Engineer.
     




      Alchemy Refill Station
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      You’ve
 equipped your vehicle with everything you need in order to refill 
consumed alchemical substances during a breather (a 15-30 minute break).
 Over the course of a single breather the refill station in your vehicle
 will allow an alchemist to refill used alchemical potions they’ve 
brewed. The alchemy refill station will allow a maximum number of 
refills per breather based on the marque of this augment. You must be 
adjacent to or inside the vehicle in order to use the refill station.
      
      1 alchemical potion
      
      2 alchemical potions
      
      3 alchemical potions
      
      4 alchemical potions
      

      All Terrain
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Your
 vehicle is adept at moving through terrain (either by having rotating 
machetes on the front or by having a vehicle that’s just great at 
sliding in-between brush). Your vehicle cannot be slowed by rough 
terrain.
      
      Note: This 
augment always acts as marque I for the purposes of determining cost, 
though you can learn this augment despite your skill in engineer.
      

      Armsmith Utilities
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Your
 vehicle is outfitted with a small forge, extra equipment, and various 
tools used to fix your armor, weapons, and firearms. A vehicle outfitted
 with armsmith utilities can be used to repair any broken armor or 
weaponry during a breather (a 15-30 minute break). A person who knows 
Armsmith augments can also switch out augments on an item. The 
armsmither may change a number of marques based on the marque of this 
augment. You must be adjacent to or inside this vehicle in order to use 
armsmith utilities.
      
      1 armsmith augment may be changed
      
      2 armsmith augments may be changed
      
      3 armsmith augments may be changed
      
      4 armsmith augments may be changed
      

      Blazing Speed
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Can only be applied to Autos
      
      Requires: vehicle to be augmented to have the Improved Speed augment
      
      Your
 vehicle is stupidly fast. Your speed is improved based on the marque of
 this augment. (This bonus stacks with that granted by Improved Speed.)
      
      +50 speed
      
      +100 speed
      
      +150 speed
      
      +200 speed
      

      Blurring Speeds
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Can only be applied to Autos
      
      Your
 vehicle is built to go so fast that nothing else can hit it. When 
traveling at your top speeds, your vehicle is little more than a blur. 
You vehicle gains a bonus to its evade rolls whenever you’re moving at 
its top speed (and until the pilot’s next turn, when the speed is 
adjusted). The evade bonus is based on the marque of this augment.
      
      +3 on evade rolls
      
      +4 on evade rolls
      
      +5 on evade rolls
      
      +6 on evade rolls
      

      Buoyancy Release
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Cost to Activate: 1 AP reflexively
      
      When
 your vehicle starts to sink or hits the water and isn’t equipped for 
staying afloat, you can hit your buoyancy release in order to stay 
afloat. The pilot may activate the buoyancy release for 1 action point, 
and it will cause the vehicle to stay afloat despite any injuries the 
vehicle has taken.
      
      A 
foe may attack the buoyancy release mechanism. The buoyancy has a number
 of wounds based on the marque of this augment.
      
      6 wounds
      
      12 wounds
      
      18 wounds
      
      24 wounds
      

      Climber
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Whether
 it be iron hooks built into your treads or a more straightforward set 
of arms and legs extending from your vehicle, it now has the ability to 
climb. You may apply your vehicle speed to moving up and down vertical 
surfaces.
      
      Note: This
 augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining cost, 
though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Engineer.
     




      Difficult Controls
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Your
 vehicle is complex, poorly organized, and the controls aren’t well 
labeled. In all ways, it is designed for you. Anybody else attempting to
 pilot your vehicle must spend extra action points in order to change 
the speed or turn the vehicle.
      
      +1 action point to pilot
      
      +2 action points to pilot
      
      +3 action points to pilot
      
      +4 action points to pilot
      

      Note:
 You may designate one other person as being able to pilot your vehicle 
as well, so they do not take the penalties for the difficult controls.
      

      Drill
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Your
 vehicle has a drill, and this drill lets you move through the earth. 
You may apply your vehicle speed to moving through the earth. You may 
change directions as you drill forward, going up, down, left, or right.
      
      The
 drill does not allow you to drill through all substances. The thickness
 of the substance you can drill through depends on the marque of this 
augment. If it is too thick for you to drill through (which will be 
decided by the narrator), you will not be able to pass through it.
      
      Thin soil, dirt, and sands
      
      Ice, thick soils, and wet sands
      
      Weak stone, compressed soils, and clays
      
      Worked stones, mountains, soft metals
      

      Ease of Repair
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Your
 vehicle is made so that the gears and engine are easy to access and 
repair. Whenever somebody is attempting to use the Vehicle Repairs 
specialty or Maintenance specialty on the vehicle, they gain a bonus on 
the roll.
      
      +2
      
      +4
      
      +6
      
      +8
      

      Efficient Movement
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Can only be applied to Clankers
      
      You
 clockwork engines respond seamlessly, letting you squeeze out every 
ounce of movement from your clanker. Your speed increases.
      
      +20 speed
      
      +40 speed
      
      +60 speed
      
      +80 speed
      

      Emergency Parachute
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Cost to Activate: 1 AP reflexively
      
      When
 your vehicle starts to lose altitude and is going to crash, you can 
release your emergency parachute in order to slow your descent. The 
pilot may activate the emergency parachute for 1 action point, and it 
will cause the vehicle to float slowly to the ground despite any 
injuries the vehicle has taken. The vehicle will fall 10 feet per turn.
      
      A
 foe may attack the emergency parachute. The parachute has a number of 
wounds based on the marque of this augment.
      
      3 wounds
      
      6 wounds
      
      9 wounds
      
      12 wounds
      

      Extra Passengers
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Requires: vehicle to be augmented to have the Passenger augment
      
      You’ve
 outfitted your vehicle with small compartments, uncomfortable back 
seats, and barrels that hang from the main seat that are all capable of 
carrying extra passengers. You may add a number of extra passengers (in 
addition to the passenger allowed from your Passenger augment). This 
does not make the vehicle much larger, despite logic dictating otherwise
 (hey, it’s steampunk!).
      
      +1 passengers (to a total of 1 pilot & 2 passengers)
      
      +2 passengers (to a total of 1 pilot & 3 passengers)
      
      +3 passengers (to a total of 1 pilot & 4 passengers)
      
      +4 passengers (to a total of 1 pilot & 5 passengers)
      

      Flying
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Can only be applied to Clankers & Takes up 2 Augment Slots
      
      You’ve
 attached cranked propellers or wings to your clanker, letting you soar 
through the air. You may move your vehicle through the air, traveling in
 any direction.
      
      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Engineer.
      

      Gliding
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Your
 vehicle is equipped to glide for a while after the vehicle has stopped 
moving. If you turn off your vehicle or it can’t move (for any reason) 
while it’s in the air, the vehicle will glide forward for a number of 
turns before it loses its ability to glide. It will continue to move 
forward at its speed but will lose 10 feet of altitude per turn. It will
 glide for a number of turns based on the marque of this augment.
      
      2 turns
      
      4 turns
      
      6 turns
      
      8 turns
      

      Improved Construction
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Your
 vehicle is built exceptionally well, made sturdy, strong, and tough to 
take down. Your vehicle has extra wounds based on the marque of this 
augment.
      
      +12 wounds
      
      +24 wounds
      
      +36 wounds
      
      +48 wounds
      

      Improved Speed
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Can only be applied to Autos
      
      You’ve streamlined your vehicle to make it faster. Your speed is improved based on the marque of this augment.
      
      +50 speed
      
      +100 speed
      
      +150 speed
      
      +200 speed
      

      Lift
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Can only be applied to Autos
      
      Your
 vehicle can support itself through vertical lift, either through a 
lighter-than-air envelope or a graviton sphere. If you are combining 
Lift with Aerial Propulsion, you’ll be able to move vertically a certain
 distance based on the marque of this augment as well as move 
horizontally based on your speed. Lift only lets you move vertically, 
and it acts independently of all other speeds. The pilot of the 
automatic vehicle will need to set the lift speed as well (which costs 1
 action point to change).
      
      20 feet of vertical movement
      
      40 feet of vertical movement
      
      60 feet of vertical movement
      
      80 feet of vertical movement
      

      Passenger
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      You’ve
 installed a second seat in your vehicle - good job, now your friend can
 come with you! You may carry a single passenger in your vehicle. (This 
does not increase the size of your vehicle.)
      
      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Engineer.
     




      Power Thrusters
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Can only be applied to Autos
      
      Activation Cost: 0 AP (but done when changing speed)
      
      You’ve
 applied extra thrusters to your vehicle that make you move 
exceptionally fast. Unfortunately, it makes you so fast that your 
vehicle starts to break down. Any time you adjust your speed, you can 
choose to freely activate your power thrusters. This increases the 
vehicle’s maximum speed based on the marque of this augment. However, 
every turn that you have your power thrusters activated, your vehicle 
loses 1 wound.
      
      +100 speed beyond your vehicle’s maximum speed
      
      +200 speed beyond your vehicle’s maximum speed
      
      +300 speed beyond your vehicle’s maximum speed
      
      +400 speed beyond your vehicle’s maximum speed
      

      Side Thrusters
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
      
      Side
 thrusters allow you to quickly toss to the side, bolting out of the 
way. Side thrusters can be activated at any time for 1 action point, and
 they send your vehicle a certain distance based on the marque of this 
augment. You may have your side thrusters send you in any direction 
(regardless of the direction you’re traveling), and you may go any 
distance, up to the maximum allowed by the side thrusters. You cannot 
travel through solid terrain.
      
      up to 20 feet
      
      up to 40 feet
      
      up to 60 feet
      
      up to 80 feet
      

      Silent Movement
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Your
 vehicle is well-greased, quiet, and difficult to hear. When somebody is
 listening for your vehicle, they must make a Cunning result to hear, 
based on the marque of this augment.
      
      Tier 2 Cunning to detect
      
      Tier 3 Cunning to detect
      
      Tier 4 Cunning to detect
      
      Undetectable (unless you can achieve a tier 5 Cunning)
      

      Speed Durability
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      It’s
 difficult for attacks to damage your engine. An attack that damages 
your vehicle must do a certain amount of wounds damage before it 
decreases your speed. (Normally 1 wound damage would decrease your speed
 by 10 for autos or 5 feet for clankers.)
      
      3 wounds from a single attack before speed is reduced
      
      6 wounds from a single attack before speed is reduced
      
      9 wounds from a single attack before speed is reduced
      
      12 wounds from a single attack before speed is reduced
      

      Sturdy
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      The
 vehicle is strongly built and gains an increased soak class. This soak 
class is not from armoring, but rather comes from the basic soak of the 
vehicle. (As such, it cannot be sundered or broken like normal 
armoring.) The amount of soak class is based on the marque of this 
augment.
      
      +1 soak class
      
      +2 soak class
      
      +3 soak class
      
      +4 soak class
      

      Thick Exhausts
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Thick
 steam, smoke, and smog rolls out from your vehicle, clouding the area 
around you. The exhaust coats your vehicle, making it difficult to 
target your vehicle. Generally, this is made not to negatively effect 
the pilot of any gunners on board. The thick exhausts gives you a bonus 
on your evade based on the marque of the augment. (If the attacker has 
any ways of negating penalties caused from cover or poor sight, they can
 negate this as well.)
      
      +1 on evade rolls
      
      +2 on evade rolls
      
      +3 on evade rolls
      
      +4 on evade rolls
      

      Underwater Propulsion
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      Your
 vehicle has fins, jets, propellers, or some other way of moving through
 the water. You may apply your vehicle speed to moving underwater. You 
can change directions, moving up, down, or forward. Underwater 
propulsion also allows you to move through the air, but you move at half
 your speed (unless you have Aerial Propulsion).
      
      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Engineer.
     




      Weapon Mount
      
      Vehicle Augment
      
      You’ve
 outfitted your vehicle with a weapon turret that you can fire from the 
cockpit. The weapon is built into the vehicle, and can be augmented as a
 weapon. If you have any passengers in the vehicle, they can operate the
 weapon instead. If the weapon requires the wielder to be in firing 
position, the weapon always counts as being in firing position.
      
      You
 can detach or reattach the weapon for a number of action points 
depending on the marque of this augment.
      
      3 action points
      
      2 action points
      
      1 action point
      
      1 action point reflexively
      

      Automatic versus Manual Vehicles
     



      There are two ways of controlling vehicles, automatically propelled vehicles and those that require manual control.
     



      Automatically
 propelled vehicles (autos) are those that go at a constant speed unless
 the pilot changes the direction or speed of the vehicle. Autos 
typically have propellers, wheels, jets, or sails. Autos have a maximum 
speed, and they travel a set distance every turn (typically at the 
beginning of the pilot’s turn).
     



      Manual
 vehicles (clankers) require the pilot to spend action points for every 
movement. Typically these are walking vehicles, where the pilot must 
move gears and levers every time the clanker wants to move. In effect, 
every time the pilot spends 1 action point to move the clanker, the 
clanker moves its speed.
     



      You’ll
 find information on autos starting on this page, with their augments 
directly after. After autos, you’ll get information on the clankers. 
Once all of that is done, you can build a vehicle’s hull, providing it 
with armoring and protection for those inside.
     







      Piloting your Auto
     



      Control Method c
     



      While
 autos can be propelled by anything in your imagination, at default your
 craftable mount is grounded, with a maximum land or water surface speed
 based off of the marque of this specialty. It costs an action point to 
mount or dismount your auto. Your auto can be turned on and off for one 
action point. While piloting your auto, your defense and evade (and 
accuracy and strike, if applicable) are added to that of the vehicle.
     



      When
 you start your auto, select a speed setting between 5 feet per turn and
 its maximum speed per turn. While turned on, it will move at that speed
 every turn at the beginning of the pilot’s turn. It costs one action 
point to change the speed. It also costs one action point to control its
 movement during a turn, moving up to its current speed setting. If you 
do not spend the action point to control it, it will automatically move 
its last set speed in a straight line in the same direction it last 
moved.
     







      Body of the Machine c
     



      At
 default your vehicle can hold only one person at a time: its pilot. 
Your vehicle cannot protect its pilot from harm; the pilot can still be 
targeted as per normal.
     



      Your
 automatic vehicle has a default maximum wounds of twelve and can be 
targeted by hostiles without the need of a called shot. Whenever your 
vehicle takes wounds damage, its maximum speed decreases by 10 feet. 
Should your automatic vehicle lose all of its wounds, your auto ceases 
to move. If it is in the air when this happens, anyone riding your 
vehicle will suffer falling damage. If on water, your vehicle will begin
 to sink at a rate of twenty feet per turn.
     



      This
 specialty works within the marque system. As your skill in Engineering 
grows, your autos will become faster and more efficient, increasing its 
maximum speed per turn.
     



      Maximum of 150 feet per turn
     



      Maximum of 200 feet per turn
     



      Maximum of 300 feet per turn
     



      Maximum of 500 feet per turn
     







      Conceptualizing your Vehicle
     







      When
 you first start building vehicles, they’re not going to be full-fledged
 airships. Taking Auto-Wright will basically give you an engine that you
 can sit on or strap to your back. At the most basic levels, you 
probably have little more than a motorized bicycle or a propellered 
surf-board.
     



      By
 taking augments, you can improve on the vehicle. When you take Aerial 
Propulsion or Lift, you’ll be able to soar the skies on a rocketpack. 
Want to take your friends with you? The Passenger and Extra Passengers 
augments will be your choice. Is your vehicle’s a little too rickety and
 easily destroyed for your liking? Taking Improved Construction and 
Sturdy will solve that problem.
     



      By
 adding armoring, your vehicle can become a mobile tank, a weapon 
platform, a flying gunship, or whatever you can imagine.
     



      And
 though you’ll be able to accomplish a lot, your vehicle’s going to 
start off simple. Barely a vehicle at all: just an engine, and some 
basic controls.
     







      Piloting your Clanker
     



      Control Method c
     



      While
 manual vehicles can be propelled by anything you imagine, by default 
your craftable mount is grounded, with a land or water surface speed 
based off of the marque of this specialty. It costs an action point to 
mount or dismount your clanker. Your clanker can be turned on and off 
for one action point. While piloting your clanker, your defense and 
evade (and accuracy and strike, if applicable) are added to that of the 
vehicle.
     



      It
 costs the pilot one action point to move the vehicle up to its full 
movement speed. The vehicle can move as many times per turn as the pilot
 can spend action points to do so. It can move in any direction without 
having to spend action points to turn, slow down, or any of that 
hogwash. It cannot climb or submerge itself. It costs an action point to
 mount or dismount your vehicle.
     







      Body of the Machine c
     



      At
 default your vehicle can hold only one person at a time: its pilot. 
Your vehicle cannot protect its pilot from harm; the pilot can still be 
targeted as per normal.
     



      Your
 manual vehicle has a default maximum wounds of twelve and can be 
targeted by hostiles without the need of a called shot. Whenever your 
vehicle takes wounds damage, its maximum speed decreases by 5 feet. 
Should your vehicle run out of wounds, your manual vehicle ceases to 
move. If it is in the air when this happens, anyone riding your manual 
vehicle will suffer falling damage. If on water, your manual vehicle 
will begin to sink at a rate of twenty feet per turn.
     



      This
 specialty works within the marque system. As your skill in Engineer 
grows, your clankers will become faster and more efficient, increasing 
its speed per action point spent.
     



      Up to 40 feet per action point spent
     



      Up to 80 feet per action point spent
     



      Up to 120 feet per action point spent
     



      Up to 160 feet per action point spent
     







      Armoring Vehicles
     



      Vehicle Armorer
     



      Engineer Specialty
     



      A
 vehicle without armoring is little more than an engine and some sort of
 control system. You’ll give it a shell, a hull to keep the pilot, the 
engine, and everything you love safe. You can now armor vehicles.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain the armoring on several 
vehicles based on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. They can then
 be upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty,
 which can be selected under “armoring augments” below. These augments 
have marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. See 
the “Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for more 
information.
     



      Vehicle
 armoring can be upgraded with 3 augments. Some materials can only be 
upgraded twice (like wooden armoring) or just once (if you choose 
organic armoring). Sometimes an augment will take up multiple augment 
slots. If an augment is worth 2 slots, armoring only has 1 more 
available slot for an augment after the 2-slot augment has been applied.
     







      Amount of Armoring you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build the armoring on some 
vehicles entirely out of scraps. This armoring must be constantly 
maintained by you and stops functioning soon after leaving your care. 
You may build and maintain a number of vehicle armoring for free based 
on your DIY score. You may create more armoring or augment old armoring 
during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Armoring z
     



      If
 you need to create armoring that you can’t build for free from your DIY
 score, you will need to buy the materials for it. Armoring will have a 
base materials cost. It is 1/5th the market price.
     



      Armoring,
 unaugmented, will have a base cost depending on its size. If you buy 
armoring with augments, you will add the price of the augments onto the 
price of the vehicle.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment outside of your DIY Score, you pay 1/5th 
the price, which is the same as if you were buying an augment one marque
 lower. (As in, the material cost for a Marque III augment is the market
 price for a Marque II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 
augment is 30 princes.
     







      Beta Armoring
     



      Engineer Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Engineer & Vehicle Armorer specialty
     



      Your
 armoring is beyond that seen before, but it is nearly impossible to 
pilot a vehicle covered in the stuff. Such armoring can be upgraded with
 2 more augments (bringing the total for metal armoring up to 5 
augmentable slots).
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to operate a vehicle covered in your 
armoring, they must succeed in rolling a science result one tier higher 
than the highest level marque you have on your armoring. If your 
armoring has a Marque IV augment, it is impossible for them to use it 
(unless they can somehow obtain a tier result of 5 with their Sciences 
attribute).
     



      If
 you are a passenger in a vehicle that has beta armoring that you 
created, you can allow another person to pilot the vehicle.
     







      Prototype Armoring
     



      Engineer Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Engineer, Vehicle Armorer, & Beta Armoring specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta armoring and made it user-friendly. Now anybody can
 pilot a vehicle covered in your armoring as long as you designate it as
 being a prototype.
     







      p Armoring Augments M
     



      Airtight
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      The
 vehicle can go higher in the atmosphere or underwater. While the 
airtightness is a factor, so is the vehicle’s ability to withstand 
pressure. If there is no way of breathing, oxygen will eventually run 
out of an airtight vehicle.
     



      The vehicle can go to cloud level or just below the surface of water
     



      The vehicle can go to cloud level or deep underwater
     



      The vehicle can go above clouds or to the ocean’s bottom
     



      The vehicle can skim the top of the atmosphere or reach the abysses of the ocean
     







      Effective Armoring
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      Your
 vehicle’s armoring is streamlined, slick, and it’s surprisingly easy to
 ensure that bullets aren’t going to make it through. The pilot gains a 
bonus on the vehicle’s defense roll.
     



      +2 on defense rolls
     



      +4 on defense rolls
     



      +6 on defense rolls
     



      +8 on defense rolls
     







      Electro-Absorption
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      The
 armoring re-routes electricity through it and into specially created 
devices that absorb the shock. Anything that deals electricity damage is
 now entirely soakable, and attacks that deal electricity damage (even 
if they are only partially electrical, such as attacks with a pulsing 
weapon) increase the soak class of the armor.
     



      +2 soak class against electrical attacks
     



      +4 soak class against electrical attacks
     



      +6 soak class against electrical attacks
     



      +8 soak class against electrical attacks
     







      Emergency Landing
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      Your
 armor is built to withstand crashes. When crashing (though we hope it’s
 not often), the hull can soak a certain amount of damage and keep it 
from being inflicted upon the crew.
     



      10 damage
     



      50 damage
     



      100 damage
     



      250 damage
     







      Exceptional Structure
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      Requires: armoring to be augmented to have the Structural Integrity augment
     



      Your
 vehicle’s armoring is exceptional, providing greater support and a 
thicker buffer between your hard, outer shell and the gooey insides. 
This grants you additional hit points, which stack with those granted by
 Structural Integrity.
     



      +20 hit points
     



      +40 hit points
     



      +60 hit points
     



      +80 hit points
     







      Fireproofing
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      While
 coated in armoring that has fireproofing, all fire attacks are 
soakable. Furthermore, the soak class for the armoring is improved 
against fire.
     



      +1 soak class against fire
     



      +2 soak class against fire
     



      +3 soak class against fire
     



      +4 soak class against fire
     











      Flame Retardant
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      The armoring generally cannot be caught on fire, depending on how intense the fire is.
     



      Cannot be caught on tier 1 fire
     



      Cannot be caught on tier 2 fire
     



      Cannot be caught on tier 3 fire
     



      Cannot be caught on tier 4 fire
     







      Greater Crew Cover
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      Your
 vehicle’s armoring is designed to keep you and any passengers alive for
 significantly longer. The greater crew cover improves the cover by a 
degree (or more, depending on the marque). For example, if you’re in 
vehicle with Marque I Greater Crew Cover light armoring, everyone on 
board can take advantage of medium cover. The maximum cover is total 
cover, in which the people inside the vehicle cannot be targeted.
     



      improves cover by 1 degree
     



      improves cover by 2 degrees
     



      improves cover by 3 degrees
     



      improves cover by 4 degrees
     







      High Mobility
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      The
 armor is optimized to be lightweight, easy to move in, and not clutter 
up your vehicle’s amazing speed. This augment decreases the speed 
penalty the vehicle takes from wearing the armor. It decreases it by a 
degree - for example, if you’re using Marque I High Mobility light 
armoring, it would have the speed penalty of minimal armoring.
     



      the speed penalty is 1 degree lighter
     



      the speed penalty is 2 degrees lighter
     



      the speed penalty is 3 degrees lighter
     



      the speed penalty is 4 degrees lighter
     







      Internal Oxygen Supply
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      Your armoring provides oxygen for your vehicle. It will last for a definite period, depending on the marque.
     



      10 minutes
     



      60 minutes
     



      1 day
     



      1 week
     







      Structural Integrity
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      The
 armoring was built to be exceptionally sturdy, granting hit points to 
the vehicle. Like normal, hit points are damaged before wounds.
     



      +10 hit points
     



      +20 hit points
     



      +30 hit points
     



      +40 hit points
     







      Thick Armoring
     



      Armoring Augment
     



      You’ve thickened your armoring without impeding your creation at all. You grant the armor extra soak.
     



      +1 soak class
     



      +2 soak class
     



      +3 soak class
     



      +4 soak class
     







      Type        Soak Class        Evade
     



      Penalty        Auto
     



      Penalty        Clanker
 Penalty        Passenger 
Cover        Material Options
     



      Unarmored        0        -        -0
 ft.        -0 
ft.        None        None,
 Organic, or Textile
     



      Minimal        1        -1        -10
 ft.        -5 
ft.        Poor (+2 
evade)        Metal, Organic, 
Textile, or Wood
     



      Light        2        -2        -20
 ft.        -10 ft. 
        Light (+4 
evade)        Metal, Organic, 
Textile, or Wood
     



      Medium        3        -4        -40
 ft.        -20 ft. 
        Medium (+6 
evade)        Metal, Organic, or
 Wood
     



      Heavy        4        -6        -60
 ft.        -30 
ft.        Heavy (+8 
evade)        Metal or Wood
     



      Super-Heavy        5        -8        -80
 ft.        -40 
ft.        Total (cannot be 
targeted)        Metal or Wood
     
















      Gadgetry Skill
     



      Gadgets,
 doodads, trinkets, whatchamacallits - these are inventions that mad 
scientists would be proud of, items that permeate society and make life 
easier (or, at the very least, more exciting). A gadgeteer is a 
specialist in the wild mechanisms of technology, building explosives, 
fantastic eyewear, and any number of trinkets. The gadgeteer can be 
rather creative, using his skillset to build and augment a wide variety 
of items.
     











      Beta Hacker
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      Your
 tinkering and logic has made you adept at hacking into beta equipment. 
Whenever you are trying to work a beta item, you may add your skill in 
gadgetry to the roll. In addition, if you receive a result of 40 or 
higher, you have made a tier 5 result, and can now use Marque IV beta 
items.
     







      Dud
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      Resist: Cunning (negates)
     



      Cost: 1 AP reflexively
     



      Whenever
 someone adjacent to you is activating the fuse of an explosive, you can
 make the explosive a dud. The explosive will not explode, and your 
enemies must make a Cunning resist to realize the explosive isn’t 
functioning.
     







      Item Breaker
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      Requires: Saboteur specialty
     



      Cost: same as a Sunder
     



      Whenever you successfully sunder an item, you are able to turn off some of its augments until the next breather.
     



      Marque 1 augments are turned off
     



      Marque 2 augments are turned off
     



      Marque 3 augments are turned off
     



      Marque 4 augments are turned off
     







      Reverse Engineer
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      You
 are able to move augments from one item to another, including those you
 yourself are not capable of crafting. When reverse engineering an item,
 roll your Gadgetry. If you are unsuccessful, the augment is destroyed. 
Augments may only be moved to an item the augment could normally be 
attached to. For instance, you cannot move a melee weapon augment to a 
vehicle. This can be performed during any breather, though the exact 
amount of time this takes is dependant on the size of the device, at the
 narrator’s discretion.
     



      Can move up to a Marque 1 augment
     



      Can move up to a Marque 2 augment
     



      Can move up to a Marque 3 augment
     



      Can move up to a Marque 4 augment
     















      Saboteur
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates)
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      You
 know how to throw a wrench into another person’s plans...and their 
items. You can turn off a single augment of an item either adjacent to 
you or being wielded by someone adjacent to you.
     







      Improvised Improvements
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Gadgeteer
     



      Stance (costs 1 AP to enter)
     



      Crafted
 items seem to perform better when you’re around. When entering this 
stance, choose augments on any items within 5 feet of your current 
position, whether you are wielding the item or not. These augments act 
as if they were 1 marque higher. You can do this to 1 augment for every 4
 skill points you have in Gadgetry. If any item whose augments you’re 
improving moves away from being adjacent to you, the improvements wear 
off. To reassign which augments you’re improving, you must re-enter your
 Improvised Improvements stance. You cannot make an augment exceed 
Marque IV.
     







      Pyrotechnician
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      You’re
 a master of explosives, so full of gunpowder and fuses that you always 
run the risk of blowing off your left ear. You turn the battlefield into
 a place of nightmares, your explosions ringing in your enemies’ ears 
and burns searing off their flesh. You can now create explosives.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several explosives based
 on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These explosives can then 
be upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this specialty, 
which can be selected under “explosive augments” below. These augments 
have marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I augments. As 
your skill in Gadgetry improves, your marques will increase. See the 
“Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for more information.
     



      Each
 explosive can be upgraded with 3 augments. Some materials can only be 
upgraded twice (like wooden explosives) or just once (like organic 
ones). Sometimes an augment will take up multiple augment slots. For 
example, the “gear-rattler” augment is worth 2 slots, so an explosive 
only has 1 more available slot for an augment after “gear-rattler” has 
been applied.
     







      Number of Explosives you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some explosives entirely 
out of scraps. These explosives must be constantly maintained by you and
 stop working soon after leaving your care. You may build and maintain a
 number of explosives based on your DIY score. You may build new 
explosives or augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Explosives z
     



      If you need to build an explosive that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      An explosive will have a base materials cost. It is 1/5th the market price.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price for a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque I augment is 1 prince and 6 
dukes.
     







      Beta Explosives
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Gadgetry & Pyrotechnician specialty
     



      Your
 explosives are exceptionally complex little gizmos, but the pack they 
punch is not to be underestimated. Such explosives can be upgraded with 2
 more augments (bringing the total for metal explosives up to 5 
augmentable slots).
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta explosives they
 must succeed in rolling a sciences result one tier higher than the 
highest marque you have on your explosive. If your explosive has a 
Marque IV augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can 
somehow obtain a tier result of 5 with their Sciences attribute).
     







      Prototype Explosives
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Gadgetry, Pyrotechnician, & Beta Explosives specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta explosives and made them user-friendly. Now anybody
 can use an explosive that you designate as being a prototype.
     







      Major Explosion
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      Cost: Activating the Fuse +1 AP
     



      You’re
 skill with explosives ensures that their blast radius is larger than 
that of anybody else. When you use major explosion with an explosive, 
roll below in order to increase the area of effect for the blast.
     



      +5 feet spread
     



      +10 feet spread
     



      +15 feet spread
     



      +20 feet spread
     







      Note: You can, at your discretion, take a lower spread result.
     







      p Explosive Augments M
     



      Banshee
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The
 blast releases an ear-splitting wail, causing its victims to become 
temporarily deafened (and greatly annoying everybody else).
     



      Deafened for 1 turn
     



      Deafened for 2 turns
     



      Deafened for 3 turns
     



      Deafened for 4 turns
     







      Concealable
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The
 bomb is camouflaged and can be concealed in its environment or on a 
character’s body. The character gains bonuses on any cunning rolls used 
to hide the explosive.
     



      +3
     



      +6
     



      +9
     



      +12
     







      Concussive
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      Characters
 caught within the blast are subject to a powerful pulse, causing their 
brains to rattle in their skulls as their heads are jerked by the 
shockwave.
     



      Disoriented for 1 turn
     



      Disoriented for 2 turns
     



      Disoriented for 3 turns
     



      Disoriented for 4 turns
     







      Damaging
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The blast is souped-up to be more powerful, dealing greater amounts of total damage to those caught within its range.
     



      11 damage per the Explosive’s Marque
     



      12 damage per the Explosive’s Marque
     



      13 damage per the Explosive’s Marque
     



      14 damage per the Explosive’s Marque
     







      Delay
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The bomb can be set to automatically go off in a number of turns specified by the player.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque I for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Gadgetry.
     







      Extended Blast
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      Requires: Marque II Explosives
     



      The
 bomb has a greater radius of effect. The bomb acts normally, but also 
blasts out beyond its normal range. The bomb does damage of one marque 
lower than its own marque beyond its normal range.
     



      5 feet further
     



      10 feet further
     



      15 feet further
     



      20 feet further
     







      Flare
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The
 explosion leaves behind a piece of material which burns brightly like a
 flare, lighting the area within 25 feet for several turns. Dim light 
extends for an additional 25 feet from the source.
     



      2 turns
     



      4 turns
     



      6 turns
     



      8 turns
     







      Flash
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The blast releases a powerful flash of light, causing temporary blindness to all within the area of the explosion.
     



      Blinded for 1 turn
     



      Blinded for 2 turns
     



      Blinded for 3 turns
     



      Blinded for 4 turns
     







      Flypaper
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      If
 the target is wearing organic or wooden armor, the bomb sticks to them 
like a magnet. The target must spend 2 action point and fully resist the
 augment or be denied their ability to evade the blast.
     



      If
 the target is not wearing organic or wooden armor, it falls to the 
ground in front of them.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Engineer.
     







      Gear-Rattler
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on an Explosive
     



      The
 bomb is built to explode in such a way that it disables machinery, 
rattling gears and causing it to become stunned. When an automaton is 
affected by this augment, it is stunned for a number of action points.
     



      Stunned for 1 AP
     



      Stunned for 2 AP
     



      Stunned for 3 AP
     



      Stunned for 4 AP
     







      When
 a vehicle is affected by an explosive with this augment, it is 
uncontrollable and moves directly forward for a number of action points.
     



      Cannot be controlled for 1 AP
     



      Cannot be controlled for 2 AP
     



      Cannot be controlled for 3 AP
     



      Cannot be controlled for 4 AP
     







      Implosion
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      Your explosive pulls anyone within its blast radius towards its epicenter when it explodes.
     



      Pulled 5 feet towards the explosion’s center
     



      Pulled 10 feet towards the explosion’s center
     



      Pulled 10 feet towards the explosion’s center
     



      Pulled 15 feet towards the explosion’s center
     







      Knock Back
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The
 blast sends out a shockwave which knocks opponents back. Opponents who 
are unable to dodge the blast are pushed back from the center of the 
blast and may be knocked prone.
     



      Pushed back 5 feet
     



      Pushed back 10 feet
     



      Pushed back 10 feet and prone
     



      Pushed back 15 feet and prone
     







      Latch
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The
 bomb contains a clamp which latches it to opponents. When you throw or 
otherwise attach the bomb, the opponent must spend 1 action point to 
remove the bomb or be denied their ability to evade the blast. Also, if 
you make a called shot when attaching the weapon, the blast counts as a 
called shot to the called shot location.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Gadgetry.
     







      Launching
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The bomb is built to be launchable, increasing the distance that it can be fired.
     



      +10 feet
     



      +20 feet
     



      +30 feet
     



      +40 feet
     







      Magnetic
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      If
 the target is wearing metal armor, the bomb sticks to them like 
flypaper. The target must spend 2 action point and fully resist the 
augment or be denied their ability to evade the blast.
     



      If
 the target is not wearing metal armor, it will stick on to any person 
within 5 feet wearing the heaviest metal armor. (If multiple people are 
wearing equally heavy armor within 5 feet, have them roll randomly to 
see who wins the right to wear the magnetic explosive. The highest 
roller gets the bomb.)
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Gadgetry.
     







      Melter
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      Takes up 2 Augment Slots on an Explosive
     



      The
 blast splashes molten metal onto armor and clothing, decreasing its 
potency and melting through it, causing it to be less useful until it 
can be repaired (which can normally be done during a breather).
     



      -1 soak class
     



      -1 soak class
     



      -2 soak class
     



      -2 soak class
     







      Proximity Fuse
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The
 bomb is set up with a fuse that causes it to detonate when somebody 
walks within the bomb’s blast area. Characters attempting to pass 
through the area without detonating the fuse must move no faster than 10
 feet per action point and roll to resist setting off the trigger.
     



      In
 order to activate a Proximity Fuse, you must first spend the usual 1 
action point to activate the fuse, then either drop or throw it. The 
fuse effect becomes active at the end of your turn.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Gadgetry.
     











      Powerful Blast
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The
 blast occurs with such speed that it is more difficult to jump out of 
its way. Characters who wish to use their dexterity to resist the blast 
must act as if their Dexterity roll to resist the blast was one tier 
lower.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Gadgetry.
     







      Quick-Set
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      Activating the fuse on an explosive costs 1 less action point (normally bringing the cost down to 0 action points).
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Gadgetry.
     







      Remote Activation
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      You
 have a trigger device that lets you activate the explosive from a 
distance whenever you so desire. It must have been set previously (for 
at least 1 turn) and you cannot be outside of a certain distance (based 
on the marque). An explosive with remote activation will not go off 
until you so designate and using the remote activation costs 1 action 
point.
     



      25 foot range
     



      50 foot range
     



      75 foot range
     



      100 foot range
     







      Searing
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      Victims
 caught within the white phosphorous blast find their skin covered in 
hot material, searing the skin. These burns will recover during the 
victim’s next breather.
     



      Tier 1 Burns (-1 on defense rolls)
     



      Tier 2 Burns (-3 on defense rolls)
     



      Tier 3 Burns (-5 on defense rolls)
     



      Tier 4 Burns (-7 on defense rolls)
     







      Slippery
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      When
 your explosive is thrown, it begins to secrete a slimy liquid, making 
it difficult to pick up. It costs 2 action points to attempt to pick 
your explosive up, and the person attempting to do so must roll their 
Dexterity.
     



      Tier 2 Dexterity to pick it up
     



      Tier 3 Dexterity to pick it up
     



      Tier 4 Dexterity to pick it up
     



      Impossible (Unless you can somehow attain a Tier 5 Dexterity result)
     







      Smoking
     



      Explosive Augment
     



      The blast fills the area with a thick screen of smoke, causing those within the area to be blinded.
     



      Dissipates in 1 turn
     



      Dissipates in 2 turns
     



      Dissipates in 3 turns
     



      Dissipates in 4 turns
     







      Resisting Explosives
     



      If
 a person is within an explosion when it goes off, they’ll take the 
damage from the explosion. The damage is soakable (meaning that they can
 roll their defense and soak some or all of the damage).
     



      A
 person can attempt to dive out of the explosion. In order to get out of
 the explosion as it’s going off, the target must spend 1 action point 
reflexively in order to try to move. The affected targets must make a 
Dexterity resist in order to escape the blast. For every tier above tier
 1 that the person receives with their Dexterity, they may lower the 
marque of the explosion by 1 (normally taking the damage class down by 
10). If they lower it at all, they may move to the edge of the blast. If
 they entirely negate the blast, they move out of it.
     







      Crafting Eyewear
     



      Optician
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      While
 you’re friends are out there becoming master swordsmen and crafting 
great war-engines, you’ve been learning how to craft goggles. You can 
now create eyewear.
     



      Unless
 you’ve gained extra eyes or somehow have grafted eyewear, you are 
limited to looking through one piece of eyewear. Even if you have 
multiple sets of eyes, you can only look through a single piece of 
eyewear at a time.
     



      Without
 spending any money, you can build and maintain several sets of eyewear 
based on your current Do-It-Yourself (DIY) score. These eyewears can 
then be upgraded with augments. You’ll learn 2 augments from this 
specialty, which can be selected under “eyewear augments” below. These 
augments have marques. At lower levels, you’ll start with Marque I 
augments. As your skill in Gadgetry improves, your marques will 
increase. See the “Crafting” page at the beginning of this chapter for 
more information.
     



      Each
 eyewear can be upgraded with 3 augments. Some materials can only be 
upgraded twice (like wooden eyewear) or just once (like organic ones). 
Sometimes an augment will take up multiple augment slots. For example, 
the “alert” augment is worth 3 slots, so an eyewear has 0 more available
 slot for an augment after “alert” has been applied.
     







      Number of Eyewears you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some sets of eyewear 
entirely out of scraps. These eyewears must be constantly maintained by 
you and stop working soon after leaving your care. You may build and 
maintain a number of eyewears based on your DIY score. You may build new
 eyewears or augment old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Eyewear z
     



      If you need to build eyewear that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      Every
 augment will increase the price. The higher the marque, the greater the
 price. The market price for an augment can be found in the chart below.
     







      If
 you are building the augment, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying an augment one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III augment is the market price for a Marque 
II augment.) The material cost for a Marque 1 augment is 1 prince and 2 
dukes.
     







      Beta Eyewear
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      Requires: 4 skill points in Gadgetry & Optician specialty
     



      You
 thought you were being clever when you decided to add a bunch of extra 
lenses and loupes onto your monocle. Instead, now nobody else can figure
 out how to use them. Such eyewears have two more slots for you to place
 augments into.
     



      If
 anybody other than you attempts to use one of your beta eyewears, they 
must succeed in rolling a science result one tier higher than the 
highest level marque you have on your eyewear. If your eyewear has a 
Marque IV augment, it is impossible for them to use it (unless they can 
somehow obtain a tier result of 5 with their Sciences attribute).
     







      Prototype Eyewear
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      Requires: 16 skill points in Gadgetry, Optician, & Beta Eyewear specialties
     



      You’ve
 perfected your beta eyewears and made them user-friendly. Now anybody 
can use an eyewear that you designate as being a prototype.
     











      p Eyewear Augments M
     



      Alert
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      Takes up 3 Augment Slots on Eyewear
     



      Alert
 goggles have small sirens built into them which go off whenever they 
sense something headed in your direction. Small lights in the lenses 
point you in the direction of the objects in question.
     



      +1 on evade rolls
     



      +2 on evade rolls
     



      +3 on evade rolls
     



      +4 on evade rolls
     







      Dark Adaptor
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      The eyewear is built to allow you to see in the dark as if it were normal daytime vision.
     



      Poor Lighting
     



      Poor Lighting
     



      Total Darkness
     



      Total Darkness
     







      Far-Sight
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      Far-sight goggles allow the wearer to see things at distances that seem superhuman.
     



      Can see 1,000 feet farther away with ease
     



      Can see 2,000 feet farther away with ease
     



      Can see 3,000 feet farther away with ease
     



      Can see 4,000 feet farther away with ease
     







      Frightening Faceplate
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      You’ve
 added decoration to your eyewear designed to make your face more 
intimidating while wearing them. This gives you a bonus when 
intimidating someone
     



      +2 to Cunning for intimidation
     



      +4 to Cunning for intimidation
     



      +8 to Cunning for intimidation
     



      +16 to Cunning for intimidation
     







      Happy Place Vision
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      Takes up 3 Augment Slots on Eyewear
     



      Regardless
 of what kind of situation you are in, Happy Place Vision makes whatever
 you fear the most look like your favorite dessert! While using eyewear 
with Happy Place Vision, you will never become scared or flustered.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Gadgetry.
     







      Heat Detection
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      Your
 eyewear can pick up heat signatures on other people, allowing you to 
faintly see people through cover. You can see people through degrees of 
cover based on your marque.
     



      Poor Cover
     



      Light Cover
     



      Medium Cover
     



      Heavy Cover
     







      Inventory Investigator
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      Cost: 1 AP to activate
     



      Perfect
 for lawmen searching hoodlums for hidden weaponry (and for pickpockets 
sizing up a potential target), you’ve augmented your goggles with the 
ability to see some of the items a target within 25 feet has concealed.
     



      Can tell if they have concealed items, but can’t identify them
     



      Knows how many concealed items they have, but can’t identify them
     



      Identifies all concealed items on target
     



      Identifies all items on target and determines if they are augmented
     







      Pin-Pointing
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      Cost: 1 AP to activate
     



      The
 user of Pin-Pointing eyewear is capable of improving his or her depth 
perception and accuracy using a cross-hair and a series of finely tuned 
zoom lenses. The lenses must be adjusted, so the user must spend 1 
action point before firing to reap its effects.
     



      +1 to accuracy
     



      +2 to accuracy
     



      +3 to accuracy
     



      +4 to accuracy
     







      Poison Detection
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      Poison-detecting eyewear reacts to invisible poisons, helping to alert the wearer of possible threatening chemicals.
     



      +3 to notice poisons
     



      +6 to notice poisons
     



      +9 to notice poisons
     



      +12 to notice poisons
     







      Protective
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      Protective eyewear add extra tiers of soak and resist bonuses against attacks that are directed against the eyes.
     



      +1
 soak class against called shots to the eyes & +3 on Brute resists 
against things that affect eyes
     



      +2
 soak class against called shots to the eyes & +6 on Brute resists 
against things that affect eyes
     



      +3
 soak class against called shots to the eyes & +9 on Brute resists 
against things that affect eyes
     



      +4
 soak class against called shots to the eyes & +12 on Brute resists 
against things that affect eyes
     







      Tinted
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      Tinted
 eyewear not only looks super-cool, but also prevents the user from 
experiencing the negative effects of some flashes of light.
     



      +3 to resist being blinded from flashes
     



      +6 to resist being blinded from flashes
     



      +9 to resist being blinded from flashes
     



      +12 to resist being blinded from flashes
     







      Weatherproof
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      The eyewear allows you to see well through sleet, snow, and rain. You take no penalty for looking through inclement weather.
     



      Note:
 This augment always acts as Marque II for the purposes of determining 
cost, though you can learn this augment despite your skill in Gadgetry.
     







      Zoom Lens
     



      Eyewear Augment
     



      Cost: 1 AP to activate
     



      Zoom
 lenses are used commonly by long-ranged riflemen in order to increase 
their range on the battlefield. For an extra action point to adjust, 
ranged weapon users (except those using throwing weapons) may gain a 
bonus to their range.
     



      +50 feet
     



      +100 feet
     



      +150 feet
     



      +200 feet
     







      Trinket Crafter
     



      Gadgetry Specialty
     



      You can create trinkets, a catch-all term for small contraptions that do some really unique things.
     







      Number of Trinkets you can Maintain  z
     



      Without
 needing to buy pieces or parts, you can build some trinkets entirely 
out of scraps. These trinkets must be constantly maintained by you and 
stop working soon after leaving your care. You may build and maintain a 
number of trinkets based on your DIY score. You may build new trinkets 
or replace old ones during any period of downtime you have.
     







      The Cost of Trinkets z
     



      If you need to build a trinket that you can’t build for free from your DIY score, you will need to buy the materials for it.
     



      Each
 trinket has a slight variation in cost, and that cost will be noted 
below the trinket (in a chart showing the market prices).
     



      If
 you are building the trinket, you pay 1/5th the price, which is the 
same as if you were buying a trinket one marque lower. (As in, the 
material cost for a Marque III trinket is the market price for a Marque 
II trinket.) The material cost for a Marque 1 trinket is 1/5th the price
 of the Marque I trinket.
     











      p Trinkets M
     



      Aether Pointer
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Resist: Cunning (marques down)
     



      Activation Cost: 2 AP
     



      A
 miniscule, highly concentrated beam of light is emitted by this 
contraption through the use of a weak aether resonator. Not large enough
 to light much of anything, the best use of this object is shining it 
into the eyes of others for your own enjoyment. (If you attempt to point
 the aether pointer at somebody’s eyes, you must make an accuracy versus
 their evade, and then they must resist the effect.)
     



      Blurry vision (-2 to accuracy and evade) until the end of their next turn
     



      Blurry vision (-2 accuracy & evade) for the next 2 turns
     



      Blurry vision (-2 accuracy & evade) for the next 3 turns
     



      Blurry vision (-2 accuracy & evade) for the next 4 turns
     







      Alarm Box
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Resist: Cunning (marques down)
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP (see below)
     



      This
 small, unremarkable box can be activated and deactivated for 1 action 
point. Whenever someone enters a space adjacent to the person carrying 
an activated alarm box, its pivoting speaker turns toward them and 
blasts an ear-piercing siren. Afterward, the alarm box shuts down, 
requiring it to be reactivated. Someone must move towards the alarm box 
for it to sound; carrying or throwing an alarm box past someone or 
activating an alarm box for use against someone already adjacent to you 
will not activate its alarm.
     



      Deafened (-2 evade) for 1 turn
     



      Deafened (-2 evade) for 2 turns
     



      Deafened (-2 evade) for 3 turns
     



      Deafened (-2 evade) for 4 turns
     







      Alchemical Tooth
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Cost: 0 AP
     



      This
 fake tooth is in reality a small capsule you can fill with a dose of an
 alchemical potion! For no action point cost during your turn you can 
bite down on it to release the potion into your system.
     



      Tooth is crushed after every use, ruining your smile
     



      Tooth can be refilled during a breather (15-30 minute break)
     



      Tooth can be refilled for 3 AP
     



      Tooth can be refilled for 1 AP
     







      Collapsible Ladder
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium or Heavy (when unwound)
     



      The
 collapsible ladder is a bundle of rods that, when unwound, form 
together to make a ladder. The ladder requires action points to set up 
and take down, and it only goes so high, depending on the marque of the 
ladder.
     



      10 feet high and requires 10 AP to set up
     



      20 feet high and requires 7 AP to set up
     



      30 feet high and requires 4 AP to set up
     



      40 feet high and requires 2 AP to set up
     







      Engineer’s Patch
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Application Cost: 2 AP
     



      Engineer’s
 patches are magnetic patches able to quickly attach and shape to an 
automaton or vehicle, temporarily repairing it. Patches are not a 
permanent fix. Patches can be hit as a called shot location on the item 
they’re attached to. If the patch is hit by a called shot, its wearer 
will lose the regained wounds from the patch as well as take the damage 
from the attack.
     



      Restores 4 wounds
     



      Restores 8 wounds
     



      Restores 12 wounds
     



      Restores 16 wounds
     







      Extending Periscope
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: 1 AP per 5 feet extended
     



      You
 have a one-handed and portable periscope that can be maneuvered around 
any number of corners, out of water, or out of a cloud of smoke. The 
periscope is not very discreet in-and-of itself, and trying to be sneaky
 about it will require a Cunning roll as if you were hiding yourself. It
 costs 1 action point to extend your periscope 5 feet, and the periscope
 can be extended a maximum distance based on its marque.
     



      20 feet
     



      40 feet
     



      60 feet
     



      80 feet
     







      Gasmask
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Cost to Put On: 3 AP
     



      Not
 only does this poignant fashion statement require no hands when it’s 
strapped to your face, it also helps filter your breathing, protecting 
you from harmful airborne chemicals. Only one can be worn at a time.
     



      +4 to resists against alchemical gases
     



      +8 to resists against alchemical gases
     



      +12 to resists against alchemical gases
     



      +16 to resists against alchemical gases
     







      Grabnet
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: as a thrown weapon attack (generally 2 AP)
     



      A
 medium-sized restraining device, people you successfully hit with your 
net act as if they have been grabbed without you having to be 
up-close-and-personal with them. While under your net they cannot take 
any actions other than removing the net capturing them. It can be used 
on enemies adjacent to you or shot through a firearm with the delivery 
augment.
     



      Costs 1 AP to remove the grabnet
     



      Costs 2 AP to remove the grabnet
     



      Costs 3 AP to remove the grabnet
     



      Costs 4 AP to remove the grabnet
     







      Grapple-Gun
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: 1 AP to launch, 1 AP to unlatch, 1 AP to retract
     



      This
 is a metal grappling hook launching device. The hook is designed to 
mechanically bend outward, attaching itself onto most surfaces 
perfectly. You can unlatch the hook from any surface with a simple tug 
on its line. It can stick to most ledges and flat surfaces regardless of
 whether it is rocky, magnetic, rough, or slick. The maximum length of 
chain, cable, or rope that it can successfully propel upwards is 50 
feet. How fast it can pull you upwards is based on its marque. If you 
can get footing on the surface you are climbing, your climb speed is 
added to the speed of your grappling hook. While hanging from one 
grappling hook, you can easily fire another one further upwards with 
your other hand if you have a spare.
     



      20 feet per action point spent retracting
     



      30 feet per action point spent retracting
     



      40 feet per action point spent retracting
     



      50 feet per action point spent retracting
     







      Grease Guzzler
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Resist: Dexterity (negates, see below)
     



      Activation Cost: 3 AP
     



      This
 little contraption pours slippery grease all over a small area. Anybody
 who walks into the space of a grease guzzler must make a Dexterity 
result of tier 2 or fall prone. Upon standing up and trying to move, 
they must make the resist again. A grease guzzler may be used up to 
three times before having to refill it with the slippery grease.
     



      Covers a space 5 feet x 5 feet
     



      Covers a space 10 feet x 5 feet
     



      Covers a space 10 feet x 10 feet
     



      Covers a space 15 feet x 10 feet
     







      Handcuffs
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Resist: Brute (negates)
     



      Cost: 1 AP
     



      Handcuffs
 allow you to put a hold on someone you’re already grabbing. Perfect for
 those gentlemen adventurers of weaker physique, you can attach one cuff
 of your set to any body part you currently are grabbing. Its extendable
 chain design allows it to tighten around the biggest (and smallest) of 
limbs. One set of handcuffs consists of two cuffs which can attach to 
one limb apiece. They remain attached until the person bound by them is 
able to break free or until you voluntarily remove them. Until then, the
 wearer of your handcuffs acts constantly grabbed. They can move, but 
once both cuffs are grabbing something they can’t use any limbs your 
handcuffs are attached to.
     



      Tier 2 Brute to break free
     



      Tier 3 Brute to break free
     



      Tier 4 Brute to break free
     



      Impossible (Unless you can somehow attain a Tier 5 Brute)
     







      HoverPack
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Heavy
     



      The hover pack is a large boxy backpack that contains a graviton sphere allowing its wearer to hover vertically.
     



      May move vertically 5 feet per move
     



      May move vertically 10 feet per move
     



      May move vertically 15 feet per move
     



      May move vertically 20 feet per move
     







      Illumitorch
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Activation Cost: 1 AP
     



      An
 illumitorch looks, in many ways, like a normal torch. The difference is
 that it has a small bulb at the end. By rotating a knob, the 
illumitorch creates light up to a distance away determined by its 
marque. It can be dimmed to illuminate anywhere from 5 to the maximum 
feet away. If you’re using an illumitorch in a small or enclosed area, 
it’s likely to light the entire area.
     



      25 feet
     



      50 feet
     



      75 feet
     



      100 feet
     







      Insta-Bridge
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: 1 AP (see below)
     



      The
 Insta-Bridge is perfect for the more venturesome traveler. Perfect for 
passing over ravines or creating handy ramps up hills, the Insta-Bridge 
is 5 feet wide and hand-cranked. For every action point you spend 
cranking it, it will extend or retract 10 feet, extending as far as its 
maximum length. It can be cranked in and out from either of its two 
ends. While extended out 10 feet or more, the Insta-Bridge becomes too 
cumbersome to lift.
     



      25 foot maximum length
     



      50 foot maximum length
     



      75 foot maximum length
     



      100 foot maximum length
     







      Jaws of Life
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: 2 AP to activate
     



      The
 jaws of life is a tool with thin, metal blades sticking out from its 
base. It’s used for prying things open by sliding its blades into an 
opening and activating it. Roll Brute on behalf of the tool, using the 
indicated bonus.
     



      +4 on the Brute roll
     



      +8 on the Brute roll
     



      +12 on the Brute roll
     



      +16 on the Brute roll
     







      Metal Cutter
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      The
 metal cutter looks like a large pair of steam-powered wire snips and 
functions in much the same way. Using the metal cutter requires 3 action
 points, but it can automatically cut through a certain thickness of 
metal.
     



      3 inches of metal
     



      6 inches of metal
     



      1 foot of metal
     



      3 feet of metal
     







      Messenger Sphere
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Cost: 2 AP to insert item, 3 AP to activate
     



      An
 efficient mode of communication, the messenger sphere appears as 
nothing more than a small hollow sphere you can place a single 
concealable item, most commonly a written note, into. A destination can 
be programmed into it using dials representing longitude and latitude. 
When activated sides of the sphere extend outward to form propellers, 
spinning quickly to create lift. It will then fly toward its destination
 at a speed based on its marque.
     



      185 feet per turn (roughly 500 miles a day)
     



      370 feet per turn (roughly 1000 miles a day)
     



      555 feet per turn (roughly 1500 miles a day)
     



      925 feet per turn (roughly 2500 miles a day)
     







      Mold-Maker
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      A
 trinket made for the more thrifty adventurer, the mold-maker is a 
blanket which hardens when it is wrapped around items of a size 
determined by its marque. This allows you to recreate any item you come 
across at its base material cost without the need of a crafter 
specializing in that field. The mold-maker only copies the shape of an 
item and thus cannot replicate augments of any kind. After so many uses 
the mold-maker will become stuck in the form of the last item it copied.
 The mold-maker takes about two minutes to use.
     



      Can wrap around light or smaller items
     



      Can wrap around medium or smaller items
     



      Can wrap around heavy or smaller items
     



      Can wrap around super-heavy or smaller items
     







      Note: Most merchants won’t appreciate you making molds of their wares. Please use responsibly.
     







      Mostly-Universal Lock
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Cost: 1 AP to lock a held item, Ranged Called Shot to throw
     



      As
 the name implies, this lock can secure almost anything. Doors, luggage,
 handcuffs, vehicles and more can be sealed shut with this device, and 
it takes anyone trying to lockpick it two free hands and an amount of 
action points based on the marque of this augment to do so. If thrown 
accurately, it will automatically lock any compatible item it lands on.
     



      If
 you crafted the lock, you can also craft keys for it at no cost. Keys 
allow you to unlock the lock for 1 action point.
     



      3 AP to pick the lock
     



      5 AP to pick the lock
     



      7 AP to pick the lock
     



      10 AP to pick the lock
     







      Note: Making keys for a Mostly-Universal Lock has a material cost of 1 dukes per key and a market cost of 5 dukes.
     







      Omni-Trinket
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light (see below)
     



      Tired
 of having to switch between all of your trinkets? The omni-trinket 
combines trinkets together into a single item, allowing you to hold 
multiple trinkets at once! The omni-trinket at default is a light item, 
but increases in size to match the largest sized item attached to it. 
Items attached can be switched out during a breather (a 15-30 minute 
break). You must spend action points to use each item individually; you 
cannot combine actions to reduce action point cost.
     



      Combines up to 2 Trinkets
     



      Combines up to 4 Trinkets
     



      Combines up to 6 Trinkets
     



      Combines up to 10 Trinkets
     







      Palm Injector
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Activation Cost: 0 AP
     



      This
 trinket puts a small button in your palm, hooked up to an injector 
line. When you push the button (an action that requires no action 
points), you are injected with a single alchemical substance of your 
choosing. Replacing the alchemical substance after use requires a number
 of action points based on the marque of the palm injector.
     



      4 action points to reload
     



      3 action points to reload
     



      2 action points to reload
     



      1 action point to reload
     







      Alchemical substance not included.
     







      Parachute Glider
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: 1 AP (can be done reflexively)
     



      Designed
 with daredevils in mind, the parachute glider is a trinket you can wear
 on your back. Not only will it prevent you from taking any damage from 
falling, it will also keep you aloft by gliding in place without falling
 for a number of turns based on its marque, allowing you to keep on 
fighting any airborne foes who sank your battle-airship. Your fall 
begins when your action points refresh after your final turn of gliding.
 The parachute glider includes a ripchord allowing you to end your time 
gliding prematurely for no action point cost.
     



      1 turn before falling
     



      2 turns before falling
     



      5 turns before falling
     



      10 turns before falling
     







      Pitcase
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: 1 AP to place, 3 AP to throw
     



      This
 trendy leather briefcase can quickly reveal the metal spiral on its 
side to be a collapsible drill. When placed in an adjacent space or 
thrown up to 25 feet away, the pitcase will drill a circle 5 feet in 
diameter downwards up to 15 feet (you can set it to a lower distance 
manually for no action point cost at any time before use). It can also 
be held to tunnel you in any direction at a rate of 15 feet per action 
point. The pitcase cannot burrow through worked stones, mountains, 
metals or similar materials.
     



      Note:
 This market price for this trinket is 25 princes (and so costs 5 
princes to make).
     



      Portable Doorframe
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: Based on Marque (see below)
     



      Designed
 for true eccentrics, this gadget produces a free-standing doorframe, 
complete with door and knobs on both sides, at a moment’s notice. This 
doorframe accomplishes little past putting a door between you and any 
pursuers, although they can simply open it for 1 action point or 
alternatively move around it. It easily attaches to any wall or to other
 doorframes, although opening it while it’s attached to a wall will 
reveal the solid wall behind it. It provides heavy cover to anyone 
standing behind it while it is free-standing and closed.
     



      2 AP to deploy/retract
     



      1 AP to deploy/retract
     



      0 AP to deploy/retract
     



      0 AP to deploy/retract (and can be done reflexively)
     







      Porta-Bull
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Cost: 3 AP
     



      Enemies
 behind cover will fear your crafty visage when you walk up to their 
barricades and smash them with your tiny trinket. The porta-bull is a 
handheld device designed to attach to a single piece of cover and 
repeatedly beat it with a hydraulic ram until it breaks. It can be 
thrown a maximum of 50 feet. After a certain amount of damage to the 
cover it attaches itself to, the porta-bull will fall off and will need 
to be picked up before it can be used again. Any damage it does to a 
piece of cover lasts until someone can repair the cover outside of 
combat. This device has too much trouble staying attached to flat, 
unmoving surfaces to be able to ever attach to a living creature.
     



      Lowers cover by one degree before falling off
     



      Lowers cover by two degrees before falling off
     



      Lowers cover by three degrees before falling off
     



      Lowers cover by four degrees before falling off
     







      Note: The porta-bull is not strong enough to damage anything considered full cover.
     







      Propeller Boots
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      These
 boots are simple looking enough, except for the large flip-out device 
on the back. Once activated (for just 2 action points), the boots 
activate a propeller on the back that comes around over the heel of the 
boot. This grants a speed bonus to the wearer when swimming.
     



      +5 to swim speed
     



      +10 to swim speed
     



      +15 to swim speed
     



      +20 to swim speed
     







      Pulse Detector
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Resist: Cunning or Spirit (negates, see below)
     



      Activation Cost: 2 AP
     



      This
 is a small, flat, metal device with a glass cover. It is able to pick 
up on the heartbeats of organisms around it. After picking up on a heart
 beat, the trinket will display it by raising small pins under the glass
 in the direction of the heart beat’s source.
     



      Somebody
 who is aware of the pulse detector can attempt to hide their heartbeat,
 which requires a Cunning or Spirit resist (target’s choice) with a 
result equal to the item’s marque.
     



      Detects heart beats within 25 feet
     



      Detects heart beats within 50 feet
     



      Detects heart beats within 75 feet
     



      Detects heart beats within 100 feet
     







      Reasonable Doubt
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Cost: 1 AP to place, 2 AP to throw
     



      Worried
 about getting fingerprints on a lock? Perhaps you simply prefer to have
 someone, or something, else do the dirty work? The Reasonable Doubt 
lockpicking device will attach to any lock and quickly get to work 
picking it for you. When your action points refresh it will spend a 
number of action points picking the lock based off of its marque.
     



      1 AP per turn spent lockpicking
     



      2 AP per turn spent lockpicking
     



      3 AP per turn spent lockpicking
     



      4 AP per turn spent lockpicking
     







      Spring-Loaded Sleeve
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Cost: 0 AP to activate
     



      The
 spring loaded sleeve holds a light weapon or small item (such as a 
potion vial or explosive). With a flick, you can release the spring, 
sending the item straight into your hand. (If your hand is not free, 
it’ll fall at your feet...and break, if it’s a potion vial.) Retracting 
the spring takes a few seconds, depending on the marque of the sleeve.
     



      2 AP to retract
     



      1 AP to retract
     



      0 AP to retract
     



      0 AP reflexively to retract (can do it during anyone’s turn)
     







      Toolbelt
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      This
 utilitarian fashion accessory can store a number of light-size items. 
These items are considered drawn, allowing you to switch between them at
 no action point cost during your turn. Unfortunately any items attached
 to your toolbelt are unconcealable and suffer a -8 when resisting 
sundering. Wearing the toolbelt does not require hands.
     



      Can hold two light items
     



      Can hold four light items
     



      Can hold six light items
     



      Can hold eight light items
     







      Vacuum of Fire
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: 2 AP to release fire
     



      What
 appears to be nothing more than a common household cleaning appliance 
is actually the latest in fire-fighting technology. When aimed at a fire
 of any kind within 10 feet, this suction device will decrease the 
amount of action points required to put the fire out to a minimum of 1 
action point. Once the required action points have been spent, you can 
choose to extinguish the fire normally or suck the fire into your 
vacuum. If you choose the latter, you can spray the fire back out onto a
 different area or person. It retains whatever tier of fire it was 
previously and can be blasted anywhere within 10 feet. The vacuum can 
hold one charge of fire at a time. If the fire it ingests would normally
 destroy it from the outside, it will destroy it from the inside as 
well, the flame extinguishing afterwards. You can permanently extinguish
 a flame inside of your vacuum for no action point cost at any time.
     



      -1 AP to extinguish flame (to a minimum of 1)
     



      -2 AP to extinguish flame (to a minimum of 1)
     



      -3 AP to extinguish flame (to a minimum of 1)
     



      -4 AP to extinguish flame (to a minimum of 1)
     







      Walker
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Medium
     



      Cost: 1 AP to activate
     



      This
 is a device that walks forward in a straight line at a speed of 20 feet
 per turn. It weighs roughly equivalent to a gnome and sets off most 
traps it walks across.
     



      Will take 10 damage before breaking
     



      Will take 20 damage before breaking
     



      Will take 30 damage before breaking
     



      Will take 40 damage before breaking
     







      Wall-Scaler
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      This
 handheld item has a rotating, barbed head at the end. It will snatch on
 to any wall it is put up against and climb up it, leaving small 
indentions along the wall. It requires one hand to hold on to, and 
cannot climb up very solid walls (like a wall made out of steel) or 
inclines.
     



      Wall-scaler can move 10 feet per turn
     



      Wall-scaler can move 20 feet per turn
     



      Wall-scaler can move 30 feet per turn
     



      Wall-scaler can move 40 feet per turn
     







      Water-Filter
     



      Trinket
     



      Size: Light
     



      Cost: 2 AP per vial
     



      Ideal
 for travelers entering less-hospitable areas of the world (or afraid of
 poisons), this bottle cap fits onto most vials of liquid. Its 
perforated top can be used to pour out any unwanted particles and 
chemicals, leaving you with a vial of pure water. This filter will break
 with repeated uses.
     



      3 uses before breaking
     



      15 uses before breaking
     



      75 uses before breaking
     



      500 uses before breaking
     







      Note: A water filter made with your DIY will never break unless it leaves your care.
     































      Chapter 11 - Narrating
     



      Introducing the Narrator
     



      At
 the gaming table, the players are responsible for a handful of things: 
they must bring their character sheet, a couple pencils, some dice, 
maybe even a miniature. They should also be keeping up with the game’s 
narrative and the recurring characters in the world. Of course, their 
greatest responsibility is roleplaying their characters appropriately 
and making sure that they’re adding to their fellow adventurers’ 
enjoyment of the game.
     



      The
 narrator’s responsibilities are similar, except the narrator must bring
 a greater imagination and energy level to the game. What is the 
narrator? Where a player represents a single character interacting with 
the world, the narrator is literally everything else.
     



      The
 narrator is every other person in the world. The narrator is 
responsible for describing every setting and event. The narrator is the 
director of the adventurers’ story. They players are the main 
characters, and the narrator is the supporting caste, the antagonists, 
the challenges, and the setting it all takes place in. The narrator sets
 the stage, and the players take the spotlight.
     



      Cinematic Control o
     



      The
 narrator’s greatest power lies in their cinematic control. The narrator
 decides how fast the gameplay is, how quickly the next adversary 
arrives, how awesome the adventurers are when they’re swinging from 
chandeliers and fighting the berzerking elves down below. These are all 
facets of the narrator’s power.
     



      Tephra
 is designed not to impede upon your cinematic control. If you want the 
players to have to fight 20 enemies before they get some downtime to 
relax, you have control. Or, at your discretion, you can have the 
adventurers just encounter a lone warrior in town during their downtime.
 This is all part of your cinematic control.
     



      Build
 the plots you want to build and pace the story as fast or slow as you 
want.
     



      Awesomeness
 Factor: You get to choose how awesome the adventurers feel. When the 
adventurers are fighting some minions while sloshing through a swamp, 
there might not be a high level of awesome. You might downplay that 
fight, making it dirty, painful, and slow. But when they beat those 
mooks and make their way to the giant tentacled behemoth that is their 
boss, that fight could have an enormous energy level, high action, and 
great combo sequences. How awesome your characters feel is up to you.
     



      Evoking
 God Powers: As the narrator, you literally control everything that is 
not the player’s character. You have the ability to strike down an 
adventurer with a random lightning bolt, have their gun explode on them 
for no apparent reason, or simply say that they die from a heart attack 
while walking down the street. Please avoid these options - nobody’s 
going to enjoy them.
     



      You
 have the power to bend the world as you will, but by encouraging the 
adventurers to be outgoing and make of the world what they will, you’re 
giving them the power. They’ll surprise you, keep you on your toes, and,
 in the end of the day, everyone will be having fun.
     



      Keeping Focused o
     



      Roleplaying
 among friends is always a fun and exciting dynamic but can also be 
irritating when you’re trying to advance a storyline and the players 
just want to goof around. In order to stay focused, here’re a couple 
possible solutions:
     



      Start
 with a Bang: Getting the session started can often be the hardest part 
of the game. There are a wide variety of starting methods. You could 
simply begin describing the scene. You could ask one of the players to 
describe what happened in the last session. You could throw down a stack
 of Tephra books on the table, making a bit of a thundercrack, and snap 
everyone’s attention toward you. Or you could roll a die and ask the 
player to your right to make a Dexterity resist. That’ll get their 
attention!
     



      Energy
 Levels: Narrating a game can be simultaneously exhausting and 
exhilarating. Keeping everyone’s energy level can be difficult, starting
 with your own. When you’re leaning forward in your chair, waving your 
arms around, and talking in excited voices, your players will follow 
suit. The more excited you are, the more excited everyone else will be. 
Excitement and yawns work the same way: they’re infectious.
     



      A
 lot of roleplayers will drink large quantities of soda, game all night,
 and snack on chips during the game. We at Cracked Monocle would never 
officially advise against this, but do try to get a little bit of sleep 
before the game and drink some water - caffeine is so much more 
effective when it has some water to keep hydrated.
     



      Table
 Banter: You game with a group of friends, and friends like to talk, 
especially when they haven’t seen each other in a while. Don’t try to 
quell the table banter entirely (it won’t work!), but if it becomes too 
much, ask the players if they could refocus on the storyline a bit, as 
you have some pretty awesome scenes coming up. (Give them something to 
focus on - that’ll quiet them down and get them focused!)
     



      The
 Gaming Environment: You can game pretty much anywhere: in the car, 
while tubing a river, or around a table. Yet each environment offers its
 own set of distractions to keep your game from running smoothly. If 
you’re at your house, it’s going to be the television and those cursed 
video games. If it’s at your friendly local gaming store, it’ll be 
everyone else there. If it’s in your car, it’ll be all of those silly 
people driving around you. (In all seriousness, please focus on driving 
before gaming.)
     



      If
 you’re playing in a public environment, such as at a convention or in 
your friendly local gaming store, there’ll be people passing by, things 
to look at, and interruptions. The best thing to do is just to learn to 
ignore them and get into your game: it’ll be a great life skill if you 
can master it.
     



      Descriptions o
     



      One
 of your greatest tasks is describing the world that the adventurers are
 experiencing. The better the description, the more enthralled your 
audience will be. Every aspect that you describe is an opportunity for 
the players to interact with the world. If you describe the local pub’s 
table as having some names carved into it, the adventurers might ask the
 bartender who it was that carved their names into the table. That could
 introduce them to the bartender, who they’ll get to know, then the 
adventurers will build a connection with the pub. Before long, you’ll 
have a permanent feature in your game.
     



      One
 of the best ways of describing a location is to focus in on a 
centerpiece. Say the adventurers are walking into a buzzing and crowded 
marketplace. What makes that marketplace different? The statue in the 
center, towering over nearby buildings, of Tailemy’s Beloved Mother, 
with fountains all around the tall marble statue. The statue’s 
description sets a tone for the marketplace, and helps the players fill 
in the rest of the location in their mind.
     



      Designing NPCs o
     



      First
 off, what’s an NPC? It’s a non-player character, or anybody in the 
world who is not one of the player’s characters. An NPC is a member of 
the supporting cast, an adversary, a rival, or nothing more than a 
person walking down the street, going about their business.
     



      Every
 NPC should be treated as a real person. The NPC will have emotions, 
goals, and wants. They aren’t there specifically for the adventurers 
(though they exist because of the adventurers). The more interesting and
 diverse your NPCs, the more the players are going to buy into the 
world, the more friendships they’re going to build with your characters,
 and the more that horrible events are going to emotionally affect them.
     



      Roleplaying
 a wide cast of NPCs can be difficult but exceptionally rewarding. 
Giving an NPC a noticeable cough, a habit of rubbing his nose, or a 
twitch whenever somebody mentions money will make memorable characters. 
Not every character needs to be exciting and memorable. If you use the 
same voice for all of the cityfolk, nobody’s going to be bothered by it.
 But when an adventurer wants to start interacting with somebody of 
note, give them a unique voice or mannerism and you’ll have an instantly
 identifiable NPC.
     



      And
 try to remember how you played those characters. The more consistent 
the characters are, the more attached and realistic your world becomes.
     



      Built
 to Die: You should keep in mind that all adversaries, NPCs, and 
supporting character have a high chance of dying during your saga. Don’t
 grow too attached to them - adventurers will either kill them, 
something terrible will happen to them for the sake of advancing the 
plot, or they’ll be one of the few lucky ones who survive the whole 
chain of events. Regardless, be ready for it.
     



      NPC
 Roles: The supporting cast can come in many shapes and colors. Your 
NPCs might be mere townspeople, the bartender, or a crazed mastermind 
bent on taking over the world using his small, toy-like, robot army. 
Some roles include the rival, the adversary, the mentor, the assistant, 
the merchant, the friend,  or the wildcard. The more defined a 
person’s role is in the adventurers’ lives, the more likely they are to 
seek that person out in the future.
     



      Providing Direction o
     



      You
 don’t have control over where the adventurers go or how they act, but 
you can provide direction to them. The local law enforcement might come 
to them, asking the adventurers to go out of district and solve a gang 
problem for them. Or a scientist might hire the adventurers to protect 
the scientist while he unveils his newest experiment. These are hooks 
for quests and adventures that your adventurers can endeavor on. They’re
 the most blatant ways of providing direction; but, given the right 
rewards, they’re a rather effective method.
     



      Sometimes
 you’ll want to provide directions that are a bit more subtle. This can 
be done by providing clues in your description. If the players walk into
 a pub, you could describe certain characters in the pub in much greater
 detail. This draws attention to them and encourages the adventurers to 
go interact with those characters. Perhaps they’re exploring the sewers 
and notice something shiny embedded in the walls. By exploring that gem,
 they’re following your directions.
     



      The
 better your descriptions are, the more inquisitive your players will 
become. If you describe the gem in the sewer wall, they’ll start asking 
questions about it, trying to figure out how it works, what it does, or 
why it’s here. Once you start getting questions, you know your players 
are hooked.
     



      Railroading:
 You should avoid railroading your adventurers. Railroading is dragging 
the players by the nose and not allowing them to go out and explore on 
their own. Railroading is when the players feel like they have no 
options beyond the one that you’ve put in front of them, and that they 
have no control over the storyline - it’s just going to progress exactly
 as you’ve set it out to.
     



      As
 you grow as a narrator, you’ll learn to give such solid directions and 
descriptions that the adventurers will want to follow your plots and 
storylines without feeling like they’re being led. If you absolutely 
must railroad the storyline, make sure that the train’s cabins are 
plenty big enough for the players to still feel like they have room to 
explore.
     



      Narrating on the Fly o
     



      Often
 times you will be called on to make things up on the fly. Suddenly, the
 adventurers are really interested in finding a perfumery and getting to
 know the owner. Well, you’ve now got to describe the perfumery, give it
 a name, and describe the old lady running it.
     



      Try
 to draw upon your own experiences or movies that you’ve seen. If you’ve
 never been to a perfumery, just try to imagine what would be there. (If
 the players think that your perfumery is unrealistic, just tell them 
that this is a unique perfumery, and the owner is a little batty - it’ll
 solve all of your problems.) Can’t think of a name? Just put a person’s
 name in front of the title of the shop - “Rose’s Perfumery” or 
“Charlotte’s Scents” will work perfectly.
     



      Being
 able to narrate on the fly will lead you to your most creative moments 
and, as a narrator, nothing can get the adrenaline going as much as an 
impromptu scene coming together.
     



      Types of Adventures o
     



      There
 are thousands of possible adventures that your players might find their
 way through, everything from daring rescues aboard airships to 
interrupting weddings because the prince is marrying a mutated hag to 
saving the city from exploding because a gnomish alchemist was about to 
accidentally mix two rather volatile chemicals in his underground 
laboratory. Here’s a couple common adventures to get those gears 
rotating:
     



      Airship
 Raid: The adventurers have to board an airship that pirates have taken 
over. Pirates are attacking the adventurer’s airship! An autonomous 
airship is devouring other airships in the sky. The adventurers are 
aboard an airship when a mutiny occurs and they need to stop it. A 
Paldoran stormship is approaching and the adventurers need to buffer 
their airship’s defenses. When you’re aboard an airship, the sky’s the 
limit for adventure design!
     



      Crypts,
 Dungeons, & Sewers: A mad scientist left a note at the capital 
saying that he’s planted a bomb in the sewers under the city. A gang of 
miscreants and mutants are attacking people then taking refuge in the 
ancient crypts built under the city’s cathedrals. Somebody breaks out of
 the local prison, and now the prisoners have taken over the entire 
complex. Delving into dark, dank, and dangerously enclosed spaces can be
 the highlight of any adventure.
     



      Murder
 Mystery: The adventurers are hired as guards at a noble ball, but the 
host is murdered during his favorite song. The adventurers keep hearing 
about disappearances at their favorite pub, and a hooded man has a clue 
about who’s going to be targeted next. The maiden voyage of an airship 
begins with disaster when the captain is killed. The adventurers are 
walking out of a restaurant where they just had lunch with an important 
duke when the entire building explodes, and they’re the only suspects! 
Every game can begin with a murder, and the bigger and flashier the 
murder, the more exciting the mystery.
     



      Political:
 A local count has been challenged to a duel, but believes that the duel
 is going to be rigged. A lady has had an adulterous affair and needs 
somebody to come clean up after her. A prolific scientist needs just a 
few more supplies to complete his experiment, but the local mafia is 
hijacking his supplies. An estranged son is the only person who knows 
the code to his late father’s vault, and what’s inside is a city’s only 
chance for survival. Political games are high-thought, 
roleplaying-oriented games that require some light steps and some fast 
thinking.
     



      These
 are just a few of the types of games you might encounter or think up, 
as there are literally thousands of options.
     







      c Different from the Master c
     



      A
 lot of games will use different terminology - you’ll see Game Master, 
Dungeon Master, Game Referee, Storyteller, and any number of other 
possible titles for the narrator. But the narrator is not the master. 
The narrator is charged with setting the scene and controlling the 
cinematic pacing of the game, but the players and their adventurers are 
the true masters of the game. The adventurers control what happens 
during the story, how they act, and what they do. The narrator simply 
reacts and keeps the game flowing in the right direction.
     



      That’s
 not to say that the narrator is without power. The narrator is the 
decider on all rules matters, controls how the world interacts with the 
characters, and whether the game can even be played at all. And, of 
course, the narrator can always use a stray lightning bolt to keep the 
players in line.
     







      c Out of Bounds c
     



      Sometimes
 the adventurers will want to explore some facet of your world that you 
haven’t developed or you aren’t ready for them to be adventuring in. If 
that happens, just let them know that you’re not ready for it. Ask your 
players if they wouldn’t mind doing something else during this game, or,
 if there’s not really any other option beyond going where they want to 
go, let them know that you’re going to need to either end the session 
early or take a break to prepare.
     



      For the sake of the game, hopefully they’ll understand.
     












      Assembling a Party
     



      Sometimes
 the hardest part of narrating is getting a group of friends who are 
willing to play together. Sometimes that transfers over into the game, 
in which the greatest difficulty is getting a group of eccentric, misfit
 adventurers to travel together. However, there are tips and tricks for 
accomplishing both monumental tasks.
     



      Appropriate Party Size o
     



      The
 game is designed for 4-5 people to be the average party size. Our 
adventurers will be balanced against 4-5 adventurers. However, the size 
of your party is whatever you are comfortable with. If you just want to 
play with 2 or 3 of your friends, that can lead to some fantastic and 
intimate roleplaying opportunities, where each character can have plenty
 of limelight time and develop into their own full character.
     



      Some
 parties, on the other hand, can be quite large. Some narrators do well 
with 6, 7, or 12 players. Handling a larger group can be a challenge, as
 it requires you to divert your attention among multiple people and keep
 track of where they are. In larger groups, it’ll be easier to focus on a
 handful of players and allow other adventurers to get lost in the 
background. When you’re handling a large group, expect some chaos, some 
splitting up of the party, and a lot of table banter. But, with 
patience, having such a large audience can lead to some truly amazing 
scenes and stories.
     



      Planning a Saga o
     



      The
 greatest stories are often told over multiple episodes. Every time your
 group gets together and plays, that’s a session. If you link the story 
and characters over multiple sessions, you’ve built yourself a saga. A 
successful saga can be earth-shattering, full of moments and memories 
that no other form of game can offer. But there are a number of reasons 
why sagas will fail, and most of the time that’s a lack of planning.
     



      While
 we’ll leave plotting out the saga to you, we have a spot of advice for 
getting all of your players ready for a saga. Foremost, let them know 
that you want a saga that will take multiple sessions. Your saga might 
just be three sessions long. It might span several years, both in our 
world and that of the adventurers. Try and find an appropriate time and 
place to meet. Many groups will play every week. For others, that sort 
of time commitment can be daunting, and biweekly sessions or fewer are 
ideal. Of course, for the truly dedicated players, even once per week 
isn’t enough.
     



      Let
 your players know what you expect from the campaign. If you don’t 
communicate that you want to run a game about big game hunters tracking 
down and killing bio-engineered abomination, you might get a player who 
makes an airship captain, and another player who makes a lone ninja 
warrior whose only interest is in finding her missing family. Those 
characters might not mesh so well with your saga’s goals. Let the 
players know what you want to run, and work together to make characters 
that will fit into the saga you envision.
     







      Building Characters o
     



      When
 you begin a game, make sure everyone’s on the same page with character 
creation. A brief description of the type of adventurers you expect can 
go a long way toward forming a cohesive group and a substantial 
narrative. If you tell the party, “build mercenaries,” you’re going to 
get a wide range of morality. But if you say, “build mercenaries who are
 generally good people,” you’ve narrowed the focus down enough that the 
party should come together, especially given goals that fit within that 
purview (mercenaries like money and good people have a habit of 
performing good deeds, both aspects that make adventure planning 
significantly easier).
     



      Most
 groups will want to, and probably should, build characters together. 
This will help drive home that cohesiveness, especially if the party 
discusses their respective roles. While having solid and defined party 
roles isn’t always necessary, it can definitely be beneficial when 
different aspects of combat are covered. Most often, you can build 
characters according to attributes: is there one character per major 
attribute? Is there a Brute character (who will likely be great at melee
 fighting), a Cunning character (who makes every other character even 
better, in addition to being just the right person to take care of 
out-of-combat problems), and a dextrous character (who can fill melee or
 ranged combat roles, as well as having a strong speed advantage)? 
Spirit and Sciences characters are mixed bags that are going to 
monumentally improve the party or fill roles that are lacking elsewhere.
     



      You
 can always have people build characters at home and bring them to the 
game. It’ll give you more time to play and probably create a slightly 
more eccentric group. Of course, the decision is yours.
     







      c Sagas versus Campaigns c
     



      Dungeons
 & Dragons players and those from numerous other games will give the
 name “campaigns” to their multiple-session-spanning stories. We prefer 
sagas. Campaigns evoke a sense of military strategy and warfare. Most 
campaigns in Tephra are less about the military and battle aspect and 
more about the story. When you combine multiple stories over a long 
period of time, you have a saga.
     



      That
 said, if you want to run a campaign, that’s no skin off our back. We 
just think the word saga might be more fitting.
     







      c Everything You Need to Know to Run Tephra c
     







      So
 you’ve been told, at the very last minute, that you need to run a 
Tephra game, and you’re not even very familiar with the rules. This is a
 big book. There are a lot of rules. There are thousands of character 
options. How in the world are you going to wrap your mind around this 
enormous ruleset with so little time? And with no ability to practice?
     



      Actually, it’s all quite easy.
     



      You
 can run a pretty solid game knowing only the basics of Tephra. Your 
players created their own characters so they should be able to play 
their characters correctly. You don’t need to know all of the rules for 
how their characters function. Here’s what you need to know.
     



      Attributes o
     



      You’re
 going to be asking for attribute rolls whenever the characters make an 
action that has a chance for failure or great success. Your characters 
have five attributes: Brute, Cunning, Dexterity, Spirit, and Sciences. 
When they roll, they’ll tell you what tier they received, ranking them 
from 1 (adequate or average) up to 4 (stunningly beyond human). Here’s 
when to ask for them:
     



      Brute:
 Call for a Brute roll when your characters are doing something that 
involves physical strength and stamina. Are they holding a door closed? 
Are they trying to wrestle an object out of an enemy’s grasp? Are they 
trying to hold their breath while swimming through underwater ruins?
     



      Dexterity:
 You’ll need a Dexterity roll when your characters are doing something 
that requires precision or flexibility. Are they acrobatically jumping 
off a roof? Are they performing an intricate dance that requires great 
footing? Or are they trying to sneak down a hallway on the tips of their
 toes?
     



      Cunning:
 The characters will need their Cunning at any point that smarts, 
charisma, or awareness come into the equation. Are they trying to 
convince a guard to let them pass? Are they trying to decipher the old 
writing on a water-stained parchment? Or are they attempting to find the
 escaped assassin who has surely hidden himself somewhere in the baron’s
 manor?
     



      Spirit:
 You’ll call for a Spirit roll when the characters need to display their
 force of self and willpower. Are the heroes tired, bedraggled, and 
aching when suddenly a chase scene occurs? Are they overcome by fear 
from size of the advancing army and trying not to run away? Or has the 
enemy taken control of their minds and only their overwhelming sense of 
self can get control of their bodies back?
     



      Sciences:
 The need for specific knowledges will have you asking for a Sciences 
roll. Are the adventurers trying to disable a bomb from taking out the 
city? Are they attempting to understand the mad scientists plans so they
 know how to thwart them? Or are they trying to repair their dirigible 
before it crashes into the mountains below?
     



      These
 five attributes will be the vast majority of rolls that you, as a 
narrator, need to call for. The rest are going to be combat specific.
     







      Running a Combat o
     



      Thankfully,
 most of the difficulty in running a successful combat comes in setting 
up a cool story and scene. Players will enjoy having their characters 
shine and blow up the bad guys with ease, so if you mess up a combat and
 make it too easy, not too worry! The awesomeness of the players will 
quickly outweigh your mistakes.
     



      Combat
 Order: Begin a combat for calling for priority. Rank everybody 
according to the highest priority rolls. Then, roll for your enemies and
 throw yourself into the ranking.
     



      Attacking:
 When you attack, you’re going to roll accuracy against their evade. If 
your accuracy is as good as their evade, you hit them. If the players 
are attacking you, you’re going to be rolling evade, and if their 
accuracy is equal or greater than your evade, they hit you.
     



      Once
 an attack has successfully landed, damage will be dealt. You can roll 
strike to see how much damage you deal. Look at the weapon’s damage 
class (for example, a normal sword, which is a medium weapon, will have a
 damage class of 6). The tier that your strike receives will multiply 
the damage class. So if you get tier 1, you’ll deal 6 damage. If you get
 tier 2, you’ll deal 12 damage. So on and so forth.
     



      Soaking
 damage works the exact same way, except that you’ll be rolling defense 
and multiplying the tier you receive with your soak class. If they deal 
you 10 damage, and you soak 2 of it, your enemy takes 8 damage total.
     



      Victory:
 Knowing how to attack is important, but what’s more important is 
knowing when for your enemies to die. If you have adversaries already 
built, you can just keep track of their hit points. But, if you don’t, 
just have them die when you think it’s best for the fight’s narrative. 
Did your adventurers just deal an awesome amount of damage to the enemy?
 Time for him to die!
     



      You
 don’t always need to be precise with your adversaries’ hit points and 
wounds. You can have them last longer (to keep a great fight scene 
going) or have them die earlier (if the fight’s gone on long enough). 
Just do what seems natural. And if you don’t want the enemy to die but 
you want to show that progress is being made, have the player who hit 
him roll for a random wound or fatal effect (found on the called shots 
page in the first chapter). That’ll make them feel equally cool.
     



      Read the First Page o
     



      If
 you read this page and you’ve read the first page of the Chapter 1: the
 Clockwork System, you’ll be more than ready to run a game using the 
Tephra rules. Now you’ve just got to make a plotline! And remember - 
bring energy to the game and have fun, and nobody will call you out for 
your rules-light approach to the game.
     















      Handling the Rules
     











      Determining Priority o
     



      When
 combat begins, normally establishing priority is the first thing that 
you’ll want to do. Priority tells you who acts first, second, and so-on.
 When everyone rolls priority, determine who has the highest priority 
and have them act first. If people tie, they can either roll off or 
allow one of the people in the tie to go first.
     



      Enemy
 Priority: You’ll roll an enemy’s priority and mix it in with the 
adventurers’ priority rolls. If you have a ton of enemies, have them all
 act at once (possibly using the average of their priority bonus to 
determine when they go). If you only have a handful, you can have them 
all go at separate times.
     



      Circumstances:
 Priority can sometimes be altered by the circumstances of the fight. If
 one person is proclaiming that they swing their steam-powered baton 
(and thus commencing combat), you can feel free to give them a bonus on 
priority. This could deserve a +3, +6, or +12 (depending on how much you
 think they deserve to go first).
     



      Remember
 though, sometimes that steam-powered baton might be in mid-swing, but 
another character still takes the higher priority. This simulates one 
character’s phenomenal reaction time. Maybe the man making the first 
attack gains a +6 on his priority, and he gets a 13 total. Still, 
Slim-Eyed Jack rolled really well and came out with a 21. The man with 
the baton is attacking fast, but Slim-Eyed Jack was ready for it and his
 reaction is going to come before the starting action is even resolved.
     



      Priority
 as a Reaction Speed: Priority can also be used to determine who acts 
first when something is immediately happening. Maybe the villain is 
pulling out his doomsday device, and two adventurers shoot at him (since
 it’s a reflexive attack). You could have both adventurers roll priority
 to determine which one gets their shot off first.
     



      Option: Rolling Early
     



      Sometimes
 (especially in bigger groups), the excitement of entering a fight can 
be diluted by rolling priority and setting up a turn order. If you feel 
like this tends to be the case, roll priority well before the combat or 
during a break. Determine the turn order in the event of a combat. 
(Then, if somebody gains a circumstantial bonus to their priority, have 
them simply move up the turn order.)
     



      This way, once combat begins, you instantly
 get to the first person’s turn. No book-keeping required.
     







      Terrain o
     



      Varying
 terrains are a great way to keep a battle interesting. While a fight in
 the middle of a grassy plain is all fine and dandy, taking that same 
fight and putting it on board a swaying airship during a lightning storm
 can take it from merely fun all the way to fantastic!
     



      Feel
 free to have fun and get creative when dealing with terrains. Wind, 
precipitation, and poor lighting will all provide cover bonuses to those
 fighting. If a fight is taking place between two speeding airships, 
give those firing between them an accuracy penalty due to the whipping 
winds between the airships. If a fight is on a bridge, let the 
adventurers and adversaries make liberal usage of their trips and 
push-backs, but then - for a more cinematic scene - let the adventurers 
make a Dexterity roll as they fall off the bridge to grab onto the ledge
 as they fall.
     



      Keep
 in mind that an enclosed area changes combat just as much as an open 
one. Any character with a heavy rifle can shoot accurately from 200 feet
 away, and if you’re using miniatures on a grid map, that’s probably 
going to be the length of the table. A fight taking place out in the 
open is going to make heavy use of firearms while the melee fighters are
 trying to make their way across the open field. But you take those same
 combatants and put them in a cramped alleyway and suddenly the melee 
fighters will shine. If you’re going to use an open field for a fight, 
throw in some rubble, trees, or old fences to act as cover. This will 
let the melee fighters and sneaky characters get closer to the ranged 
combatants while making use of cover and hiding spots, evening out the 
playing field.
     



      Stealth & Infiltrations o
     



      Stealth
 missions can be extremely rewarding, but likewise exceptionally 
difficult to pull off, especially with a full team of 4-5 adventurers. 
Often times a stealth mission will be a brief aside accomplished by one 
or two members of the party who are well equipped for it. Here are some 
tricks to keep in mind when dealing with stealth and infiltrations.
     



      Give
 Players Different Roles: Normally, an infiltration is going to be led 
by the one or two people in the party who have a high enough dexterity 
to sneak in somewhere silently. But while they’re doing that, where’s 
the brutish character in heavy armor going to be? Why, he’s making a 
distraction downstairs! Perhaps the brute character helps pummel the 
guards at the front door, drawing guards away from the back while the 
stealthier characters rush in.
     



      Inventors
 and smart characters can help with the planning, or they can tag along 
just behind the stealthy characters to help deal with any surprises. 
Cunning is just as important to stealth as is Dexterity. Dexterity rolls
 will be used to see how quietly a person can move, but cunning will 
help pick locks, find hiding spots, and get through any situations with 
minimal problems. Espionage, a Cunning skill, is the bread and butter 
here.
     



      Your
 goal should be to make everyone feel important. While not every 
character is properly equipped to perform the infiltration, everyone 
brings something to the table. Some people are talkers, some people are 
good at getting to the rooftop, and the tinkerer is going to have a 
number of gadgets that will get the party through locked doors, past 
traps, and right into their destination.
     



      Regularity
 of Checks: Having the adventurers roll their Dexterity to see how 
quietly they sneak in doesn’t need to be overdone. Have the players give
 you an initial roll when they get going to see, overall, how well they 
do. Then, if anything unusual happens, have them roll again. If they are
 nearing guards, they might roll again. If they step on a creaky step 
going up the stairs, that might call for a roll. Likewise, you can let 
the cunning characters shine by allowing them a roll to notice a creaky 
step so that the adventurers might ignore it completely. Keep each roll 
exciting and give it a reason. Let every roll increase the tension, and 
it’ll make for a more dramatic scene.
     



      Silent
 Kills: Fights are loud, messy affairs. Without silencers of some sort, 
firearms will be a dead giveaway for any battle. Most lazy guards (as 
well as any encountered servants or other random people the adventurers 
encounter during an infiltration) will have their hit points down. If 
the adventurers can deal a substantial amount of damage quickly before 
an enemy can react, they should be able to kill or incapacitate the 
target before the target can react and get their hit points up. More 
alert guards will keep their hit points up, ready for an incoming 
attack. These will be difficult battles and will likely bring trouble; 
use alert guards when you’re ready for the stealth to be at an end.
     



      The
 Quick Infiltration: Sometimes an infiltration mission doesn’t need to 
take more than 10-20 minutes of time at the table, and this is when 
having just one or two adventurers take part is key. If the adventurers 
just need to sneak into a residence, grab a key, and get out, it might 
be best to let just the more stealthy characters shine while the rest of
 the party waits at the pub. These quick infiltration missions should 
revolve keep guards mostly unaware (with their hit points down, allowing
 for quick kills), and get the adventurers in and out quickly.
     







      Assigning Attribute Penalties o
     



      You
 should be fairly liberal with attribute penalties, as a character’s 
attributes can become fairly high (especially when a character is using 
their favored attribute). When a player announces that they are going to
 roll for something, or you ask them to roll an attribute, let them know
 what penalties they’ll be taking and why.
     



      A
 character’s attributes assume everything is “average.” If they are 
trying to lift something heavy, it is of average heaviness. If they are 
trying to sneak into a room, the conditions are average. If they are 
trying to convince a guard to leave his post, there are not mitigating 
circumstances. Thus, when something is unusual, that’s when you’ll apply
 penalties. Let the player know that the statue is extremely heavy and 
will warrant a -8 on their roll. Let the player know that the hallway is
 brightly lit and the floors creak as they walk, warranting the -6 
you’re going to assign their roll.
     



      Sometimes
 a factor won’t be immediately obvious to the adventurer. Perhaps 
they’re trying to convince a guard to leave his post, but that guard is 
fiercely loyal to his employer and is well paid to be so. The 
adventurers don’t have that information, so they don’t know that it’s 
going to be exceptionally difficult to convince the guard to leave. In 
this circumstance, don’t inform the players of any penalties they’ll be 
receiving.
     



      Of
 course, this gives you the perfect opportunity to let the Cunning 
adventurer shine. Let the Cunning adventurer try to recognize when 
something is working against them. That way they’ll know what penalties 
they’ll be receiving on their rolls, and why.
     



      Ambushes & Surprise Attacks o
     



      It
 is when an ambush occurs that Tephra’s hit point system really shines. 
Hit points are a reflection of combat adrenaline and stamina, and when a
 person isn’t ready for a fight, they’re hit points aren’t up. If the 
adventurers are in a pub, resting at the end of the day, and they’re 
suddenly attacked by assassins, their hit points are going to be down. 
This will give the ambushers a quick way of dealing some solid wounds 
damage before the combat starts in earnest, giving the adventurers a 
beginning handicap.
     



      Be
 careful with your use of ambushes and surprise attacks. Adventurers 
only have an average of 12 wounds, so a good hit from a heavy rifle 
could take a character out before they even know what’s going on. While 
this is accurate to real life, it doesn’t make a very fun game. Nobody 
likes to have their prized character suddenly die when they weren’t 
ready for it. It’s not sporting.
     



      It’s
 very rare that adventurers are able to pull off a successful ambush or 
surprise attack, but, when they do, give them all of the bonuses that 
you can. An awesome victory caused by good planning will be something 
the adventurers talk about for ages to come.
     



      Point
 Blank and Off-Guard: Sometimes an adventurer will end up surrounded by 
guards, with a dozen rifles pointing at him, and his hands in the air. 
While the player might think he’s perfectly justified in believing that 
he could reach down, grab his revolvers, and start firing before a dozen
 bullets hit him and kill him instantly, it isn’t terribly realistic.
     



      Sometimes
 you must force your adventurers to have their hit points down. In such a
 situation, you should let the player know that if the gun-toting 
enemies all get off their shots first, they’ll be hitting the character 
as if the character doesn’t have their hit points up. This will 
encourage the adventurer to continue the negotiation through its proper 
course.
     



      Of
 course, a distraction (such as another character shooting one of the 
riflemen in the back) or rising tensions during the negotiation might 
give the adventurer just the moment he needs to pull out his revolver 
and get his hit points up. If such a moment arises, let the player know.
 You can also let the player make a priority roll to see how quickly he 
gets ready for combat; of course, a poor priority roll in such a dire 
situation could be lethal.
     



      Visualization o
     



      Tephra
 is designed to be a tabletop roleplaying game used with a grid on the 
table and miniatures to represent the characters. While not every scene 
or fight needs a map, some will benefit from it. We recommend using a 
grid map with 1-inch squares, but you can use whatever means you feel 
best work for you. Then just draw up your map on the grid and you’re 
good to go.
     



      Miniatures:
 Playing with miniatures representing your characters can really bring 
the action to life. Miniatures are small metal or plastic figurines, 
normally about an inch or two tall, and fitted to work perfectly within 
1-inch squares. If you don’t have any miniatures on hand, pretty much 
anything will do. A player can use a ring from their finger, a quarter 
from their pocket, or a very small picture of their character as a 
representation on the board.
     



      You
 can also use dice, but we recommend that you avoid using our beloved 
D12s to represent your character, since they can mingle with the dice 
you’re rolling and cause confusion. Use those other dice. You know, like
 the useless ones with only six sides.
     



      Moving
 Diagonally: Square grids fail to accurately reflect diagonal movement. 
We recommend that, when moving diagonally, a character consider that 
every two squares moved diagonally equals three squares moved normally.
     



      This
 is a simple rule but can also require a lot more thought at the table. 
If you choose to ignore it, that’s fine by us. Just choose your ruling 
and stick to it.
     



      The
 3rd Dimension: Moving in the third dimension, especially on a 
2-dimension playing grid, can bring in a whole slew of problems. You 
should probably mark the elevation heights of different items on the 
map. For example, you might note that the top of a building is “+20 
feet” above the ground, while a ditch is “-10 feet” below the ground 
level. If a character is flying, you can use coins to represent how high
 they are (for example, for every quarter they have under their 
miniature, they are five feet above the ground).
     































      House Rules o
     



      Sometimes
 you’ll make a ruling that differs from what Tephra recommends. You 
might even find a hole in the rules that Tephra doesn’t account for 
(oops). In these instances, just make up a house rule on the fly, let 
the players know about the house rule, and move forward. It’s also a 
good idea to let the players know that the house rule might change after
 the session if you find a better way of working it between sessions or 
discover the actual rule. But during the session, when the intensity is 
high, make the rule and move forward.
     



      House
 rules can cause some problems that you should be aware of. As we’ve 
said, Tephra is based on a complex clockwork mechanism. If you adjust 
one part, the entire system can change. When you make a house rule, let 
your players know and tell them why. That way everyone knows what’s 
changed and what’s going on. And, if another problem arises in the 
future based off your house rule, you know how to address it.
     







      c “Fudging” Rolls c
     



      As
 the narrator, you can often fudge your rolls. What is fudging? It is 
cheating, changing the number, or just assuming the result of your roll.
 Maybe the enemy rolled a phenomenal evade...for the 15th time...and you
 just want the adventurers to hit him. So you fudge it. You tell the 
player that his character hit, even though the die side otherwise.
     



      Why
 would you fudge your rolls? Some narrators will never fudge a roll, as 
it decreases the randomness and the excitement of narrating. But, 
sometimes, for sake of the storyline or the pacing of the combat, some 
narrators will alter the results of the die in order to attain a 
specific effect. Maybe this turn they really needed the enemy to hit 
harder than the die roll allowed in order for another character to make 
an appearance and save the day. Or perhaps, as in the example above, 
you’ve realized that your adversary is just too powerful and you need to
 start fudging the dice rolls to make the combat more exciting.
     



      Regardless
 of your reason, make sure that your fudging is appropriate and not 
overused. Also, don’t get caught doing it - as soon as your players 
recognize that you’re changing your own die rolls, so much of the magic 
of rolling the dice is lost. Use this power sparingly.
     











      c Grids: Squares versus Hexes c
     



      Tephra
 is designed to most easily use a square grid. However, you’ll have to 
change virtually nothing if you decide to go with hexes. A hex grid will
 give you a more realistic sense of movement, you won’t have to deal 
with any odd diagonal rulings, and turning will make a little more 
sense. You can easily swap between square grids and hex grids, so use 
whichever one you like most.
     











      Time
     







      More
 than almost anything else, Tephra is designed to keep the pacing of the
 story in the hands of the narrator. You can have a fast-paced adventure
 full of chases, epic fight scenes, and dangerous missions all in the 
course of a single day in Tephra. Or your adventure can span numerous 
weeks, taking time to play out. The rules should never hinder your 
choice of pace.
     



      Breathers o
     



      Breathers
 are small spurts of time when the adventurers can rest up, repair some 
basic gear problems, and tend to their wounds. It’s typically fifteen to
 thirty minutes, but you can adjust the length of a breather to fit the 
speed of your game.
     



      If
 you want to wear down your players a bit, involve them in a chase scene
 or multiple fights where time is of the essence. If you have a ticking 
bomb, the adventurers won’t have time for a breather to recuperate their
 hit points and fix their gear.
     



      If
 you find that your heroes are getting dangerously close to dying, let 
them have a few minutes of breathing space. If you want to keep the pace
 going, you can even say they have a breather while walking down the 
hallway from one fight to the next. Just let them know they’ve had a 
breather and restored their hit points: they’ll thank you for it.
     











      Downtime o
     



      Downtime
 is most easily defined as any length of time in which the characters 
are not actively partaking in adventure or roleplaying. You can often 
identify downtime as those periods of travel or rest when the 
adventurers just spend a couple weeks in town, or are taking an airship 
ride to a nearby city. That’s downtime.
     



      You
 should feel free to offer as much or little downtime as your plot 
requires. During downtime, characters can completely restock themselves,
 rebuild their constructions, and handle other off-screen affairs. So if
 one of the adventurers is an alchemist and he’s getting low on potions,
 it might be time to have some downtime.
     



      Partial
 Downtime: You can always choose to give partial downtime. Let’s say, 
for instance, that a party is delving through a mad scientist’s 
laboratory. They’re pretty deep in, and they’ve just found the 
scientist’s chemical set. So they want to hang out and see if they can 
replenish some of their potions. You can opt to give them partial 
downtime and let them craft a fraction of their potions. (You could say 
half, you could say 2, or you could say whatever number you feel like 
granting them.) You can also rule that they don’t have the requisite 
supplies to make their potions, so that will cut into their potential 
stock. You have control over how much time they have to restock during 
partial downtime.
     



      Number
 of Fights between Downtimes: When you have characters who use 
expendables during a fight (such as alchemic potions or explosives) or 
find that your adventurers’ gear is being broken, you might decide it’s 
time for downtime. The exact number of fights your adventurers might 
partake in between downtime varies greatly, but typically you can fit 
3-5 fights between a single downtime before the players start to feel 
very strained. It can also be a great learning experience for people who
 use expendables, since they won’t be able to replenish their supplies 
until their next downtime. Feel it out - when your adventurers are out 
of supplies and gear, downtime might be favorable. However, a fight with
 sparse resources can be a great fight indeed.
     











      The Steampunk World
     



      Levels of Power o
     



      Sometimes
 it can be difficult to grasp just how powerful your adventurers are, or
 just how world-changing your adversaries might be.
     



      The
 Average Citizen: The average citizen will be, at most, a first level 
character. Most people who would be willing to engage in a barfight will
 be first level. Most police officers will be first level. Often times, a
 farmer, factory worker, or other normal citizen will be a developing 
character - that is, below first level.
     



      From
 Normal to Epic: As your adventurers rise in power, they’re quickly 
going to start outmatching normal citizens, move beyond the scope of the
 town militia, and, in time, becoming the elites of a nation.
     



      The
 power of your characters can be easily defined based on how many action
 points they have.
     



      Levels        AP        Power Level
     



      1-3        3        In
 the earlier levels, your adventurers are starting off as average 
citizens and moving up to well-regarded warriors and crafters. By third 
level, an adventurer will be able to outmatch most people in a city.
     



      4-7        4        Once
 4 action points are achieved, an adventurer starts becoming some of the
 best in their field. The agile characters can jump as far as the 
greatest of athletes, and the inventors are crafting new technology with
 the best of them. By 7th level, adventurers will be on par with the 
best warriors in a nation or the best scientists of their generation.
     



      8-11        5        From
 8th level and on, the adventurers are hitting a whole new realm of 
experience. They have moved beyond the concepts of human ability. They 
are bordering on legendary and they can single-handedly take on numerous
 opponents.
     



      12+        6        Attaining
 12th level makes the adventurer one of the greatest people to ever 
live. The scope of their power and skill can barely even be imagined by 
people. Their abilities far outmatch that of most world-renowned 
warriors, and their inventions are incomprehensible.
     















      Beginning a Saga at Higher Levels o
     



      Sometimes
 you’ll want to start a saga at a different level from level 1. You 
might envision a game that runs the heroes from level 5 (where they’re 
gaining quite the reputation) until they hit level 8 (when they start to
 feel legendary). Perhaps you just want to run a game full of 
astonishing 12th level adventurers, almost unparalleled in the world.
     



      Higher
 level games can be both exciting and action-packed. When you skip the 
earlier levels, you are potentially skipping some solid character 
development and moving past the time when the adventurers feel quite 
mortal. But when you want to run an instantly heroic game, skipping 
those earlier levels might be exactly what you need.
     



      We’ve
 listed the starting princes for characters beginning over first level 
in chapter 2: Character Creation. They are our recommended amounts of 
princes a character of that level would have acquired, and they may 
spend them before play to buy goods at market value. You, as the 
narrator, might award more or less starting gold to reflect the type of 
story you want to tell. And remember: a group of high level impoverished
 heroes can be just as exciting (sometimes more so) than a group of high
 level wealthy adventurers.
     











      Designing Your Own Setting o
     



      We
 won’t force you to use the world of Tephra when playing the Clockwork 
System. One of its strongest aspects is its ability to be adapted to 
anything you can imagine. Does your world have teleportation? Reflavor 
the ‘Phase Step’ specialty under Agility as literally disappearing and 
reappearing somewhere else. Want a more modern setting? Turn super-heavy
 armor into bullet-proof riot gear. Summoning demons more your style? A 
quick trip to Automata will allow you to create your own otherworldly 
partners-in-crime.
     



      There
 are a couple of things to keep in mind when designing your own setting.
 What time period does it take place in? Does it take place on an 
alternate history Earth or a different planet? What types of species or 
races are available? When adapting Tephra to your setting, what parts of
 the system are unavailable in your world? Are there robots? If not, 
automaton crafting should probably not be a skill your players can use.
     



      Technology o
     



      The
 technology of a steampunk world can be one of the hardest aspects to 
grasp, especially for players coming from either a fantasy or real-world
 background. Don’t feel too locked in to any sort of technological 
realism (this is steampunk, after all!). If you say that something 
exists, it does. If you say something hasn’t been invented yet, that’s 
fine too. It’s your world. That said, here are our recommendations for 
the technological level of Tephra, explaining some concepts that a lot 
of people new to steampunk might not be familiar with.
     



      Methods
 of Communication: Radio, both short and long distance, is the most 
common form of communication, which has led many on both sides of the 
law to learn how to listen in to hidden frequencies to get the jump on 
their unsuspecting enemies. Telegrams are sent using simple codes (much 
like Morse Code). Local post offices are the easiest places to send out 
bulletins, whether it be through a letter or a radio broadcast.
     



      Methods
 of Transportation: While personal vehicles are on the rise, their 
relatively high market price keeps the average citizen from purchasing 
them. In addition, since most laborers work within walking distance of 
their homes the price of fuel far outweighs any convenience. Because of 
this, it is incredibly rare to see parking for more than a handful of 
vehicles outside of any establishments. Even those with personal 
vehicles still use trains when travelling long distances, although the 
higher classes have begun using airship ferries. People still commonly 
use mounted animals, though the practice is much more common in rural 
areas, as stagecoaches and steam-driven vehicles rule urban areas.
     







      Medicines
 (both necessary and otherwise): Instead of sending their patients to 
pharmacists, doctors keep medicinal alchemists on hand to cure most 
ailments. As such, disease is rarely an issue for anyone with enough 
money for medical bills. Every so often an illness or injury renders a 
patient incurable through normal means, which causes many to take their 
chances with illegal essence manipulation to rewrite their bodies to a 
younger, uninjured state. Others take the same chances for cosmetic 
reasons. Prosthetics are becoming increasingly popular, particularly in 
the industrial sector. While the surgery is impossibly expensive on a 
factory worker’s salary, a hydraulic-powered arm can greatly increase 
productivity. Some more successful industries will pay for building 
prosthetics onto their most loyal employees, although there has been 
sporadic public outcry about the safety and morality of such practices.
     



      Commonality
 of Super-Science: Automatons, especially ones able to think for 
themselves, are incredibly rare. Non-mechanical laborers’ salaries still
 outweigh the cost of maintaining and fueling robotic workers in the 
absence of a dedicated crafter or mechanic, which most settlements won’t
 have. Bio-fluxxed townspeople are equally rare. Having essence 
manipulations aren’t illegal, and neither is gathering essence from wild
 animals, but many people will still stop and stare at someone with 
scales covering their skin. While prosthetics are more accepted, they 
still are not considered an attractive trait.
     







      c You Own Tephra c
     



      Tephra
 is a setting that we’ve designed for you to adventure in, for you to 
create sagas and stories of your own within. The world is designed to be
 rich and full of innovative adventures, and we will be releasing more 
and more information to fill this world, more ideas for you to steal and
 use in your game.
     



      But,
 ultimately, when you’re playing in Tephra, you own it. Tephra is what 
you make of it. If you decide that, for your saga, all gnomes are idiot 
savants and all of the Izedans were wiped out by a horrible plague, 
that’s entirely up to you. And, even more so, you can feel free to 
change the details. If, in some adventure, we say that there’s a pub in 
Aldamiir that gives away free ale on Thursdays, you can say that the pub
 doesn’t exist in your Tephra.
     



      You
 might run into a player or two that assumes certain aspects of Tephra 
are there. But while you’re the narrator, the setting is yours. Just let
 them know that those locations, events, or people don’t exist like they
 do in canon Tephra.
     



      Own the world. It was made for you.
     







      Classism, Racism, Sexism, & Mechanicism
     



      Prejudice
 can be a useful tool for spicing up a setting. While a terrible reality
 most societies face, it can easily add tension between characters when 
they interact. Technophobia is an interesting prejudice for a steampunk 
setting. Whether you introduce a character who scorns technology as a 
whole or one who denies the humanity of an artificial intelligence, 
fighting against the advancement of technology can be a fascinating goal
 in a world where technology is so prevalent. That being said, too much 
of anything is a bad thing. A party of Paldoran Exiles unable to eat or 
find shelter because an entire Evanglessian town has rallied against 
them could be considered excessive.
     







      Adversaries
     







      Building
 adversaries is typically no different from building characters. Do you 
need a thug? Just create a character that has some specialties from 
frenzy, brawl, marksmanship, or whatever fits that particular thug.
     



      Sometimes
 you’ll want to tweak an adversary to fit outside the rules. Let’s say 
the adventurers are about to fight off a sniper who has a blessed eye 
that ensures all of his shots hit. There aren’t any specialties for that
 (and it certainly wouldn’t be balanced for adventurers to have), but 
you could say that the adversary has a +8 to accuracy when determining 
if he hit. There aren’t any specialties that do that, but you can adjust
 the rules as you see fit in order to make an adversary work like you 
want.
     



      Judging
 Appropriate Challenges: One of the most difficult aspects of creating 
good fights is making sure that they are both challenging without being 
impossible. The most basic goal of most fights will be to get 1 or 2 
characters into wounds, which is just enough to make the characters feel
 threatened. If the adventurers are getting into fatals too often, you 
should weaken your opponents a bit. Likewise, if the players never see 
wounds, you should up the adversaries’ levels or add more enemies.
     



      If
 the group of adventurers are fending off a single opponent, remember 
that it’s a group fighting one adversary. He’s going to need to be 3-6 
levels higher than the party in order to be challenging. One of the 
easiest rules to remember when designing an adversary is to set him “one
 action point higher” than the party. So if you have a group of 
adventurers with 3 AP each, make sure your main adversaries have at 
least 4 action points.
     



      On-the-Spot
 Adjustments: Even the best designed villain sometimes needs to be 
adjusted on the spot. Always feel free to adjust adversaries during the 
combat to make the fight more exciting. Have the adventurers just gone 
through the adversary’s hit points like they were a bad joke? Just up 
his hit points. Is he missing too often? Give him a slight bonus to his 
accuracy.
     



      Be
 careful when doing this, as your players might call you out on it and 
feel cheated. As long as your adjustments are for the betterment of the 
fight scene, though, they’ll understand.
     



      Rolling for Enemies o
     



      When
 you roll for an adversary, you can choose to either do it out in the 
open (where the players can see) or in secrecy, either behind a screen 
or in a box.
     



      Generally,
 adversaries should not re-roll pure 12s. A pure 12 is a chance to do 
something heroic and amazing, and it almost guarantees Tier 3 or Tier 4 
success. While it can be really fun for an unnamed enemy sniper to 
suddenly get a lucky shot, a beloved adventurer dying from a lucky die 
roll against an unnamed and unimportant enemy is terribly anti-climactic
 and a bit of a let-down.
     



      Important
 villains can re-roll pure 12s since they are of the same importance to 
the story as the adventurers. It makes them that much more exciting and 
frightening to fight.
     



      While
 we don’t encourage re-rolling pure 12s for most adversaries, go ahead 
and have them keep 1s as 1s.
     







      c Character Death c
     



      Unfortunately,
 sometimes an adventurer dies. It’s a career hazard. But that doesn’t 
have to be the end of the player’s game.When a character dies, you have a
 ton of options as to how to progress.
     



      Recreated:
 In a world of crazy science and bio-engineering, “death” might be as 
problematic as having a cold. If an adventurer is well-connected or is 
an important part of a quest, an organization or cult might recreate the
 adventurer. Now, he might be brought back in an automaton body with 
unusual bio-engineered augments, or through an unknown religious ritual,
 but it’s definitely possible that he could be returned to the land of 
the living.
     



      New
 Character: Sometimes death is truly the final frontier for an 
adventurer and the perfect time for a player to bring in somebody new. 
Just have them create a new character and find a way to fit into the 
current party.
     



      The
 biggest problem is creating a new character that meshes with the rest 
of the adventurers. Challenge the player to build a character that works
 within the saga and will easily mesh with the current party. Try to 
find a fluid reason for the new adventurer to join the group, else 
things might be awkward for a while.
     



      When
 you go to build a new character, you can have them start off as the 
lowest level of any member of the party, somewhere in the middle, or at 
the exact level of the deceased character.
     



      Sharing
 the Wealth: When an adventurer dies, it’s typical for parties to split 
their wealth. A clever player, however, might note that the deceased 
adventurer had a Last Will and Testament on him, which bequests all of 
his gear on to a certain character or his family. This could also be the
 perfect way of introducing a new adventurer; if the deceased 
character’s will states that he leaves all of his gear to Arther 
Cadverius, who will replace him in the event of his death, you instantly
 have a way of working the new character into the party.
     











      Rewards
     







      Treasure & Payments o
     



      Nothing’s
 better than completing an adventure and raiding the dead of all of 
their earthly possessions. While society may not appreciate the blatant 
looting of corpses, that’s probably not going to stop your adventurers 
from plundering the dead. Rewarding adventurers with treasure and 
payment for their deeds is an important part of being an adventurer or 
mercenary.
     



      When
 adventurers take on a paid mission, try to plan your payment based on 
their level. Are the adventurers just first level? Well, 5-10 princes 
would be a solid payment. If they’re fifth level, 50 princes each would 
be pretty standard. Take a look at the “starting princes per level” 
chart in the Chapter 2 - Character Creation. That will give you a pretty
 solid indicator of how many princes they should gain per level. Feel 
free to go a bit higher than that chart indicates - it assumes that 
players will be using items (such as explosives and alchemic potions) 
and those little things can add up quickly.
     



      Adventurers
 will typically steal any items they can off dead bodies, so keep that 
in mind when giving items to your adversaries. If you don’t want the 
adventurers to have a Marque IV accurate, chainsawing, lightning sword, 
you probably shouldn’t let the villain die with one on him. (Now, if the
 villain suddenly explodes right after he dies, that might solve that 
problem.)
     



      Selling
 Treasure for Princes: Treasure can always be sold to vendors after an 
adventure. Most vendors will buy things off the adventurers for a 
quarter to half the price of the item, though a well-used item might 
sell for even less. Let the adventurers barter a bit if they feel like 
they’re being swindled - just don’t let them swindle the vendor!
     



      Awarding Experience o
     



      From
 one level to the next, a character needs 12 experience points. Just 
like the turning of a clock, a character goes from noon to midnight, 
and, at the stroke of midnight, gains a new level.
     



      How
 quickly you hand out experience points determines how quickly character
 level up and gain in power. The more experience that you give to your 
characters per session, the sooner that they are going to be nearing the
 top levels and the pinnacle of their power.
     



      Typically,
 awarding 1 experience point per contentious situation will serve you 
well. If the adventurers get into a tavern brawl, that’s an experience 
point. If they figure out a puzzle to keep the church from exploding, 
that’s an experience point. If they talk their way past the guards to 
get in and see the local baron, that’s an experience point.
     



      At
 the end of a session (4-6 hours of play), most narrators will hand out 
3-4 experience points.
     



      Leveling
 Speed: If you’d like, you can think of experience in terms of leveling 
speed. If you want your adventurers to level up every 3 sessions, give 
them 4 experience points per session. If you want them to level up every
 4 sessions, give them 3 experience per session. You can speed this up 
or slow it down at your discretion.
     



      Sometimes,
 you’ll want to keep adventurers at a certain level for a while, so you 
could give them 1 or 2 experience points per session. On the other hand,
 you might want to see your adventurers at a higher level and faster, so
 you give them 7 or more experience per session early on in the saga, 
then slow down experience gains once they start reaching the levels you 
want to play in.
     



      If
 you’re giving out a slim amount of experience for a specific reason, 
but the players feel like they’re not getting enough for the amount of 
work that they’re doing, let them know why. Most players will be 
perfectly fine hearing from you that you want to keep them at level X 
for a little while, so you’ve slowed down the experience gain.
     



      And
 remember, if they don’t feel like they’re getting enough rewards from 
their adventuring, you can always give them more stories and treasures 
to make up for it!
     



      Awarding Stories o
     



      As
 adventurers progress and their exploits become things of legend, 
they’ll gain stories that you can award them. Pre-written adventures 
will include a variety of stories they might earn during the adventure, 
but you can always make up your own.
     



      If
 the adventurers save a town from a doomsday device set to make the 
local volcano go off, you could make up a story called “Saviors of 
Hollisburg.” Now all of the adventurers that received that story are 
well known for the saving the town of Hollisburg, and the people of 
Hollisburg treat them with kindness and reverence.
     



      If
 one of your adventurers challenges a well known swordsman to a duel and
 wins, they might earn the story “Vanquisher of Sir Wellington.” That 
story might come with two prongs - enemies of Sir Wellington would 
celebrate and respect the adventurer, while the friends of Sir 
Wellington might collaborate for vengeance.
     



      Stories
 work well as titles, scars, and small things that a player can be proud
 of. If an adventurer can say, “I am Arther Cadvarius, Savior of 
Hollisburg, Vanquisher of Sir Wellington,” that’s going to make the 
character instantly come to life and have a great background.
     
















      Appendices
     







      Specialty Listings
     



      Brawl (Brute)
     



      Block with a Grab        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Dirty Fighting        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Drunken Boxing        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Fisticuffs        Strike +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Fluid        Evade +2, Strike +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Grapple        Accuracy +2, Strike +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Heavy-Handed        Strike +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Hold Steady        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Knock Aside        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Monkey Wrestler        Accuracy +1, Strike +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Reversal        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Shrug Away        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Throat Jab        Strike +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +11
     



      Bone-Breaking Specialties
     



      Bone-Breaker        Strike +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +11
     



      Crippling Blow        Strike +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Combo Specialties
     



      Combo Flow        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Combo Opener        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Combo Breaker        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Finisher        Strike +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Grip Specialties
     



      Crushing Grip        Strike +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Twist        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     







      Frenzy (Brute)
     



      Adrenaline Surge        Evade +1, Strike +1, Hit Points +14
     



      Backlash        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +11
     



      Burning Revenge        Strike +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +11
     



      Carry Through        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Crimson Weapon        Strike +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Fray Fighter        Evade +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Hundred Strikes        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Liberator        Evade +2, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Merciless        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Neverending Bloodbath        Strike +2, Speed +5, Hit Points +11
     



      No Escape        Strike +2, Speed +5, Hit Points +10
     



      Raging        Strike +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Straining Blow        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +13
     



      Soulless Blade        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Walking Destruction        Strike +3, Speed +5, Hit Points +10
     



      Bloodlust Specialties
     



      Berserker        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +12
     



      Bloodlust        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Unquenchable Thirst        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +11
     



      Masochistic Specialties
     



      Laugh Like You’re Crazy        Strike +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Marriage to Suffering        Strike +2, Wounds +1, Hit Points +11
     



      Seize Your Suffering        Strike +2, Wounds +2, Hit Points +11
     







      Overpower (Brute)
     



      Brickbreaker        Strike +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Dragging        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +11
     



      Follow-Through        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Heavy Hitter        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +9
     



      Keep Them Down        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +11
     



      Monstrous Attacks        Strike +3, Defense +1, Hit Points +10
     



      No Quarter        Strike +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +11
     



      One-Handing It        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Robust Toss        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +11
     



      Shield Whack        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Solid Assault        Strike +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +11
     



      Stunning Blow        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Titanic Strength        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +8
     



      With Gusto        Strike +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Armor-Breaking Specialties
     



      Chipping Away        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Armor Sunder        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Earth-Shattering Specialties
     



      Earthquaking Strike        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +11
     



      Rampant Destruction        Strike +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +11
     



      Push Away Specialties
     



      Staggering Strike        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Bullrush        Strike +2, Speed +5, Hit Points +11
     







      Resilience (Brute)
     



      Blast Proof        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +14
     



      Body of Steel        Defense +3, Wounds +1, Hit Points +14
     



      Brace for Impact        Accuracy +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +15
     



      Bulwark        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +13
     



      Interposition        Defense +2, Speed +5, Hit Points +13
     



      Metal Embrace        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +15
     



      Never Off-Guard        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +17
     



      Press        Strike +2, Defense +2, Hit Points +11
     



      Protector        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +14
     



      Resolute        Defense +1, Wounds +1, Hit Points +13
     



      Second Skin        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +14
     



      Solid Stances        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +13
     



      Thick Skin        Defense +3, Wounds +1, Hit Points +11
     



      Tough Stuff        Defense +2, Wounds +1, Hit Points +19
     



      Unassailable Mountain        Accuracy +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +12
     



      Walking Fortress        Defense +2, Wounds +1, Hit Points +13
     



      Ward        Strike +2, Defense +2, Hit Points +11
     



      Armored Movement Specialties
     



      Armored Ease        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +12
     



      Armored Freedom        Defense +2, Speed +5, Hit Points +14
     



      Barrier Specialties
     



      Living Barrier        Defense +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +12
     



      Living Wall        Defense +2, Wounds +1, Hit Points +14
     



      Living Stronghold        Defense +2, Wounds +1, Hit Points +15
     







      Espionage (Cunning)
     



      Destabilizing Strike        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Feign Fatal Wounds        Accuracy +1, Evade +2, Hit Points +7
     



      First Strike        Accuracy +1, Priority +4, Hit Points +5
     



      Flowing Shadow        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Heartseeker        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Invisible Blade        Accuracy +1, Strike +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Master Lockpick        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Pierce the Darkness        Accuracy +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Silent Kill        Accuracy +1, Evade +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Sinister Strike        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Nightwalker Specialties
     



      Fighting Blind        Accuracy +2, Strike +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Deep Blind Senses        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Cover User Specialties
     



      Cover Expert        Evade +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Contort        Accuracy +1, Evade +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Critical Specialties
     



      Critical Hits        Accuracy +2, Strike +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Hairsplitter        Accuracy +2, Strike +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Pinpoint Shot        Accuracy +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Dirt in the Eyes Specialties
     



      Dirt in the Eyes        Evade +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Blind & Swing        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Disorienting Specialties
     



      Distracting Attack        Accuracy +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Taking Advantage        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Brain-Blowing Attack        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     







      Expertise (Cunning)
     



      Appraisal        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Concentrated Focus        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +10
     



      Deep Breath        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Demoman        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Efficiency Expert        Priority +3, DIY +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Fire Fighter        Defense +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +12
     



      Hurl        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +9
     



      Improv Fighter        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Mechanic        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Patch the Bleeding        Defense +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +11
     



      Observance        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Weak Point        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Trick Counter        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Anti-Poison Specialties
     



      Poison Finder        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +11
     



      Remove Poison        Defense +3, Priority +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Combat Insights Specialties
     



      Combat Insights        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +11
     



      Combat Analytics        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Item Appropriation Specialties
     



      Weapon Appropriations        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Quality Weapon        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Surgery Specialties
     



      Field Surgeon        Priority +2, Defense +2, Hit Points +10
     



      First Aid        Defense +2, Speed +5, Hit Points +9
     



      Self-Surgery        Priority +3, Wounds +1, Hit Points +9
     







      Showmanship (Cunning)
     



      Blindside        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Captive Audience        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Catchphrase        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Chime In        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Conveyor        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Deafening Roar        Strike +2, Defense +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Distract        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Jester        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Marionette Strings        Accuracy +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Praise        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Sleight of Hand        Evade +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Smoke & Mirrors        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Throw Off Balance        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Unmarred Perfection        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Choreographed Specialties
     



      Epic Dance        Evade +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Never Stop the Dance        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Epic Music Specialties
     



      Battle Theme        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Heavenly Serenade        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Spotlight        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Unified Chorus        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +10
     



      Victory Theme        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Smokescreen Specialties
     



      Smokescreen        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Walking Darkness        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +7
     







      Tactical (Cunning)
     



      Ally of the Machine        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Armistice        Evade +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Blitzkreig        Accuracy +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +8
     



      Call in a Favor        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Change Formation        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Change Places        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +6
     



      Crippling Formation        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Crossfire        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Forewarned        Accuracy +1, Priority +4, Hit Points +6
     



      Focused Support        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Lead the March        Speed +5, Priority +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Malleable Formation        Accuracy +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +7
     



      Master Tactician        Accuracy +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Stand-Off        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Encouraging Specialties
     



      Encouragement        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +6
     



      Inspiring Words        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Flow of Battle Specialties
     



      Direct the Battle        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Concentrated Barrage        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Overwhelm        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Order Specialties
     



      Issue Orders        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Complex Orders        Accuracy +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Improved Orders        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     







      Ace (Dexterity)
     



      Backseat Driver        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Co-Pilot        Accuracy +1, Evade +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Crash Maneuver        Accuracy +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +9
     



      Denial Maneuver        Evade +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Driving with Knees        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Flying Fortress        Accuracy +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Hold Together        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Horseman’s Cut        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Hostile Maneuvers        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Level Flying        Accuracy +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Quick-Mount        Accuracy +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Vehicular Teamwork        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Auto Piloting Specialties
     



      Strafe        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Evasive Strafe        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Clanker Piloting Specialties
     



      Extension of Self        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Piston-Spring        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Focusing Flying Specialties
     



      Focused Flying        Accuracy +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Fine-Tuned Flying        Defense +3, Priority +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Fully Focused Flying        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Mounted Cavalry Specialties
     



      Fearless Mount        Accuracy +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      One with the Beast        Strike +2, Defense +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Ramming Specialties
     



      Ram        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Puncture        Accuracy +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +9
     







      Agility (Dexterity)
     



      Battlefield Flow        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Bounding Lunge        Accuracy +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +7
     



      Charging Ram        Strike +2, Speed +5, Hit Points +6
     



      Free Movement        Priority +2, Speed +5, Hit Points +6
     



      Groundfighting        Evade +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Instant Draw        Accuracy +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Slow Falling        Accuracy +1, Evade +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Side-Swipe        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Slipstreaming        Accuracy +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +8
     



      Snake Bite        Accuracy +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Step Back        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Terrain Mastery        Priority +4, Speed +5, Hit Points +9
     



      Wall Runner        Accuracy +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +8
     



      Walk Over        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +7
     



      Explosion Dodging Specialties
     



      Blast Dodger        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +8
     



      Soaring Dodge        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +9
     



      Phasing Specialties
     



      Phase Step        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +7
     



      Fleeting Shade        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +6
     



      Leave No Trace        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +6
     



      Stance-Shifting Specialties
     



      Shifting        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Freeform Shifting        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     







      Marksmanship (Dexterity)
     



      Aim        Accuracy +2, Evade +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Cover Fire        Accuracy +1, Evade +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Follow Up        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Head Popper        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Itchy Trigger Finger        Evade +2, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Knock-Off        Accuracy +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Lockdown Gunner        Accuracy +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Long Shot        Accuracy +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Penetrating Shot        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Point Blank        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Seeker        Accuracy +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Snap Reload        Accuracy +1, Priority +4, Hit Points +6
     



      Sneaky Seconds        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Stable Shot        Accuracy +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Turret        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Warning Shot        Accuracy +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Wing Clipping        Accuracy +2, Evade +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Archery Specialties
     



      Arching Shot        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Efficient Ranger        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Flight of Arrows        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Bleeding Arrow Specialties
     



      Flesh Biter        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Flesh Piercing        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +6
     







      Swashbuckling (Dexterity)
     



      Adaptable        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Circle Attack        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Counter-Stance        Accuracy +2, Strike +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Efficient Strike        Accuracy +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Fight Anywhere        Evade +2, Speed +5, Hit Points +6
     



      Hilt Bash        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Opening        Accuracy +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Precise Attack        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Saluted Opponent        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Sword and Board        Accuracy +1, Evade +1 , Hit Points +8
     



      Wild Slash        Strike +2, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      En-Garde Specialties
     



      En-Garde        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Find the Gap        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Lightning Slash        Accuracy +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Flickering Specialties
     



      Flickering        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Torrent of Steel        Accuracy +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Footwork Specialties
     



      Footwork Training        Priority +3, Speed +5, Hit Points +8
     



      Fancy Footwork        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +9
     



      Parry & Riposte Specialties
     



      Parry        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Beat Parry        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +9
     



      Distance Parry        Accuracy +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +8
     



      Experienced Parries        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Riposte        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     







      Faith (Spirit)
     



      Blind Faith        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Conviction        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Divine Guidance        Strike +2, Defense +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Flowing Vigor        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Grief & Hope        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Healing Halo        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Infallible Faith        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Moral Support        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Prayer        Accuracy +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Purify        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Shock of Life        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +11
     



      AP Sacrifice Upgrade Specialties
     



      Devoted Peers        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Self-Sacrifice        Evade +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Silent Devotion        Evade +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Champion Specialties
     



      Appointed Champion        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Conduit of Faith        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Inquisition Specialties
     



      Proclaim the Heretic        Evade +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Light in the Dark        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Smiting Specialties
     



      Smite        Accuracy +1, Strike +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Assured Success        Accuracy +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Impassioned Victory        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Smiting Shot        Accuracy +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Zealous Smite        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +7
     







      Grace (Spirit)
     



      Bloodsoak        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Connection        Accuracy +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Danger Sense        Evade +1, Priority +5, Hit Points +9
     



      Destabilize        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Dispel Pain        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +9
     



      Force of Self        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Inner Calm        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Iron Palm        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Master of Forms        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Parting Waves        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Shocking Soul        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Spirit Break        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Spiritual Seal        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Void Strike        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Ki-Unleashing Specialties
     



      Ki Flow        Evade +1, Strike +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Ki Rage        Evade +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Light-as-Air Specialties
     



      Feather in the Wind        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +6
     



      Weightless        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Paralyzing Specialties
     



      Touch of Paralysis        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Blocked Ki        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     







      Luck (Spirit)
     



      Confident in your Luck        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Don’t Tell Me the Odds        Evade +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Cheat Fate        Accuracy +2, Evade +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Equalizing Force        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Hex        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +7
     



      Jackpot        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Jinx        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Roll of the Dice        Accuracy +1, Evade +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Roulette        Accuracy +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Spot of Misfortune        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Failure Avoidance Specialties
     



      Free from Failure        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Steady Friends        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Foul Luck Specialties
     



      Curse        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Fumble        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Luck Holder Specialties
     



      Ace Up My Sleeve        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Leading the Lucky Life        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Second Chance        Evade +1, Wounds +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Lucky #7 Specialties
     



      Lucky Number 7        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Luckier Number 7        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Ranged Evading Specialties
     



      Feeling Lucky        Evade +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Unfriendly Fire        Accuracy +1, Evade +2, Hit Points +5
     



      Unfriendly Artillery        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     







      Shamanism (Spirit)
     



      Control Beast        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Druidic        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +8
     



      Fire Resistance        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +10
     



      Geomancer        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Hardened Trainer        Accuracy +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Lion’s Roar        Strike +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Naturalist        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +9
     



      Parasite        Strike +2, Priority +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Still as Stone        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Tactics of the Wolf        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Topographer        Evade +1, Priority +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Bird Calling Specialties
     



      Avian Wrath        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Blacken the Sky        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Pitch Black        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Chemical Immunity Specialties
     



      Venom Immunity        Evade +1, Defense +2, Hit Points +10
     



      Alchemical Resistance        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +9
     



      Protective Swarm Specialties
     



      Protect the Monarch        Defense +2, Priority +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Devoted Drones        Defense +3, Priority +1, Hit Points +10
     



      Hive Exodus        Defense +2, Speed +5, Hit Points +7
     



      Swarming Insect Specialties
     



      Colony of One        Accuracy +1, Strike +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Drag Down        Accuracy +1, Strike +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Hive Mind        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Pressure Cooker        Accuracy +1, Strike +2, Hit Points +9
     







      General Science Specialties
     



      Learn Augments        Augments +4, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Nothing up my Sleeve        Accuracy +1, Augments +2, Hit Points +4
     







      Alchemy (Sciences)
     



      Immunity Specialties
     



      Self-Made Immunity        Defense +2, Augments +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Immunizations        Defense +2, Augments +1, Hit Points +6
     



      On-the-Fly Specialties
     



      On-the-Fly Brewer        Evade +1, Augments +2, Hit Points +4
     



      Expiration        Evade +1, Augments +2, Hit Points +4
     



      Herbalist        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Rapid Mixer        Evade +1, Augments +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Walking Chemical Plant        Evade +1, Augments +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Crafting Acids
     



      Acid Brewer        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Beta Acids        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Prototype Acids        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Crafting Gases
     



      Gas Brewer        Augments +2, DIY +1, Augments +4
     



      Beta Gases        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Prototype Gases        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Crafting Medicines
     



      Medicine Brewer        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Beta Medicines        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Prototype Medicines        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Crafting Poisons
     



      Poison Brewer        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Poisons        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Prototype Poisons        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     







      Armsmith (Sciences)
     



      Belt Feeder        Evade +2, Augments +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Interchangeable Parts        Priority +2, Augments +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Rapid Replacements        Evade +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Temporary Attachments        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Weapon Support        Accuracy +1, Augments +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Crafting Firearms & Crossbows
     



      Gunsmith        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Firearms        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Prototype Firearms        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Crossbow Craftsman        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Crossbows        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Prototype Crossbows        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Crafting Melee Weapons & Throwing Weapons
     



      Weapon Smith        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Weapons        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Prototype Weapons        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Interchangeable Parts        Priority +2, Augments +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Crafting Bows
     



      Bowyer        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Bows        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Prototype Bows        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Crafting Armor
     



      Armor Smith        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Beta Armor        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Prototype Armor        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     







      Automata (Sciences)
     



      Automaton Repairs        Defense +2, Augments +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Interchangeable Parts        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Crafting Steamers
     



      Steam-Powered Crafter        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Boilers        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Prototype Boilers        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Steamer Operator Specialties
     



      Steamer Operator        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Steam Poser        Evade +1, Augments +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Steam Specialist        Accuracy +1, Augments +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Crafting Fuse Boxes
     



      Fuse Box Builder        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Advanced Brainworks        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Superior Brainworks        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Heroic Brainworks        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Personality        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Crafting Clockworks
     



      Clockwork Crafter        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Advanced Analytics        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Crafting Prosthetics
     



      Prosthetician        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Beta Prosthetics        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Prototype Prosthetics        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Automata Tinkerer        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Automata Upgrader        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Nerve Crafting        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Sensory Builder        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +7
     







      Bio-Flux (Sciences)
     



      Invigoration Specialties
     



      Bio-Invigoration        Evade +1, Defense +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Bio-Invigoration Expert        Evade +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +9
     



      Quickshot Bio-Invigoration        Evade +1, Speed +5, Hit Points +8
     



      Bio-Invigoration Expert        Evade +1, Wounds +1, Hit Points +11
     



      Self-Administer        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +11
     



      Essence Manipulation
     



      Manipulate Essence        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Beta Essence        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Prototype Essence        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Fast Manipulation        Evade +1, Augments +2, Hit Points +7
     



      Body Renewal        Defense +2, Augments +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Gene Therapy        Augments +2, Wounds +1, Hit Points +9
     



      Crafting Bio-Zappers
     



      Bio-Zapper Developer        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Bio-Zappers        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Prototype Bio-Zappers        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Concentrated Stream        Accuracy +1, Augments +2, Hit Points +6
     



      Extra Settings        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Multi-Ray        Accuracy +1, Augments +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Splicer        Accuracy +1, Augments +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Tracing        Accuracy +1, Augments +1, Hit Points +7
     







      Engineer (Sciences)
     



      Maintenance        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Power Surge        Augments +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +6
     



      Quick Upgrades        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Vehicle Repairs        Defense +2, Augments +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Grease Monkey Specialties
     



      Gearhead        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Gearjunkie        Augments +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Crafting Vehicles
     



      Auto-Wright        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Autos        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Prototype Autos        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Manual-Wright        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Clankers        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Prototype Clankers        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Armoring Vehicles
     



      Vehicle Armorer        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Beta Armoring        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Prototype Armoring        Augments +1, DIY +1, Hit Points +7
     







      Gadgetry (Sciences)
     



      Beta Hacker        Evade +1, Augments +1, Hit Points +8
     



      Dud        Accuracy +1, Evade +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Item Breaker        Accuracy +1, Strike +3, Hit Points +9
     



      Reverse Engineer        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Saboteur        Accuracy +1, Priority +3, Hit Points +8
     



      Improvised Improvements        Evade +1, Augments +1, Hit Points +7
     



      Crafting Explosives
     



      Pyrotechnician        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Explosives        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Prototype Explosives        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +6
     



      Major Explosion        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Crafting Eyewear
     



      Optician        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Beta Eyewear        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



      Prototype Eyewear        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +5
     



      Crafting Trinkets
     



      Trinket Crafter        Augments +2, DIY +1, Hit Points +4
     



























































































































      Appendix I: Open Game License Version 1.0a
     



      The
 following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is 
Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc (“Wizards”). All Rights 
Reserved.
     







      1.
 Definitions: (a)”Contributors” means the copyright and/or trademark 
owners who have contributed Open Game Content; (b)”Derivative Material” 
means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations 
(including into other computer languages), potation, modification, 
correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, compilation, 
abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, 
transformed or adapted; (c) “Distribute” means to reproduce, license, 
rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise 
distribute; (d)”Open Game Content” means the game mechanic and includes 
the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent such 
content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over 
the prior art and any additional content clearly identified as Open Game
 Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License,
 including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but 
specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) “Product Identity” means 
product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including 
trade dress; artifacts; creatures characters; stories, storylines, 
plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, 
symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, 
themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio 
representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells, 
enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special 
abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, 
magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic
 designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly 
identified as Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and
 which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f) “Trademark” 
means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a 
Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated 
products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) 
“Use”, “Used” or “Using” means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, 
modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game 
Content. (h) “You” or “Your” means the licensee in terms of this 
agreement.
     







      2.
 The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that 
contains a notice indicating that the Open Game Content may only be Used
 under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any
 Open Game Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted 
from this License except as described by the License itself. No other 
terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed 
using this License.
     







      3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License.
     







      4.
 Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this 
License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, worldwide, 
royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License
 to Use, the Open Game Content.
     







      5.
 Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing 
original material as Open Game Content, You represent that Your 
Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient 
rights to grant the rights conveyed by this License.
     







      6.
 Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE 
portion of this License to include the exact text of the COPYRIGHT 
NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or 
distributing, and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the 
copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any original Open 
Game Content you Distribute.
     







      7.
 Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, 
including as an indication as to compatibility, except as expressly 
licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each 
element of that Product Identity. You agree not to indicate 
compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered 
Trademark in conjunction with a work containing Open Game Content except
 as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner 
of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product 
Identity in Open Game Content does not constitute a challenge to the 
ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity 
used in Open Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in
 and to that Product Identity.
     







      8.
 Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly 
indicate which portions of the work that you are distributing are Open 
Game Content.
     







      9.
 Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish 
updated versions of this License. You may use any authorized version of 
this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content 
originally distributed under any version of this License.
     







      10 Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You Distribute.
     







      11.
 Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open 
Game Content using the name of any Contributor unless You have written 
permission from the Contributor to do so.
     







      12
 Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of 
the terms of this License with respect to some or all of the Open Game 
Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then 
You may not Use any Open Game Material so affected.
     







      13
 Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to 
comply with all terms herein and fail to cure such breach within 30 days
 of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the 
termination of this License.
     







      14
 Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be 
unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to the extent 
necessary to make it enforceable.
     







      15 COPYRIGHT NOTICE
     







      Open Game License v 1.0 Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
     







      Clockwork
 System © 2015 by Daniel Burrow DBA Cracked Monocle. Developed, 
authored, and edited by Daniel Burrow, Henry White, Tyler Hudson, Marc 
Seidel, Garrett Sweet, Alex Whisenhunt, and Victor Helton.
     







      OPEN CONTENT: All content in this document is considered open content.
     









    Published by
    
     Google Drive
    



